---
title: Adoption
layout: lesson
description: "From Eph. 1:5, Gal. 4:5, etc., notes on the believer's spiritual adoption."
date: "FEB 2013"
---

The word adoption in the New Testament is translated from the Greek word
**huiothesia**, which means “the placing of an adult son” and refers to
the formal act of recognizing the maturity of an adult son. The word is
found in five New Testament passages: Rom. 8:15,23: 9:4; Gal. 4:5; Eph.
1:5.

The new-born baby is **brephos**, as in "the babe (**brephos**), lying
in a manger…“. The word sometimes refers to the fetus, as in”…the babe
(**brephos**) leapt in her womb…". The believer is also called
**teknon**, a child which is growing up but which is still under
parental care. Hence John 1:12, "…to them gave He power to become the
sons (**teknon**) of God." But the believer is also in union with Jesus
Christ. Jesus Christ is called **huios**, “an adult son”. So, in union
with Him, we are said to be adult sons also, although we may be brephos
or teknon by experience.

To the people living in the predominantly Greek and Roman culture of the
1st Century A.D., the word huiothesia would bring to mind the ceremony
of toga virilis, in which a 14-year-old boy went through an investiture
ceremony with the adult male members of his family. At this ceremony,
speeches of challenge to the youth would be made, and offerings would be
made to the gods. Then, the boy would stand in the center of the group
and take off the child’s garment that he wore. A new adult man’s robe,
or toga, would be placed on him. This was the toga virilis, the “robe of
a man”.

At this time, the 14-year-old was given adult privileges and
responsibilities. He could conduct business in his own name, could buy
and sell property, could marry, could vote in the Assembly, and in many
other ways could carry on as an adult citizen. Of course, he was not
mature enough or wise enough to exercise all of the privileges he had;
and he was not experienced enough to live up to all of the
responsibilities. But the seriousness of his position as a citizen was
impressed on him; and if he was intelligent and hard working, he would
grow up to be an adult having integrity and character.

## Application

The spiritual use of the word “adoption” signifies the placing of a
newborn child, in the spiritual sense, into the position of privilege
and responsibility attached to an adult son. The question arises as to
why a naturally born child needs to be adopted. Are we not, after all,
“born again”? It is here that the true meaning of “adoption” comes in;
because in the New Testament, “adoption” refers to a positional advance.
The new believer is advanced positionally to his majority, even though
at the time of salvation he is spiritually immature, a “babe in Christ”.

Because spiritual adoption takes place at the moment of salvation, there
is really no period of childhood experience recognized for believers.
The Christian has been placed into the privilege, liberty, and duty of a
full-grown adult. Spiritual adoption imposes the same way of life on all
children of God. This requirement is reasonable because the Christian
life is to be lived in the sustaining and upholding power of the Holy
Spirit. And this provision is available as much for one person as for
another.

From the International Standard Bible Encyclopedia:

> **Adoption; Sonship**[Gk huiothesía]. The Greek term occurs in the Bible
only in Paul’s Epistles (Rom. 8:15, 23; 9:4; Gal. 4:5; Eph. 1:5); for
extrabiblical usage see MM, pp. 648f The AV and RV have “adoption”
throughout. The RSV has “adoption” in Rom. 8:23; Gal. 4:5, and “sonship”
in Rom. 8:15; 9:4; in Eph. 1:5 the RSV reads “to be his sons.” The NEB
in each instance uses a phrase such as “to make us sons” or “to attain
the status of sons.”

## I. General Legal Idea

The custom prevailed among Greeks, Romans, and other ancient peoples
(including the Hurrians; see Abraham III); but it does not appear in
Jewish law.

A. In the OT Three cases of adoption are mentioned: of Moses (Ex. 2:10),
Genubath (1 K. 11:20), and Esther (Est. 2:7, 15); but it is remarkable
that they all occur outside of Palestine—in Egypt and Persia, where the
practice of adoption prevailed. Likewise the idea appears in the NT only
in the Epistles of Paul, which were addressed to churches outside
Palestine.

The motive and initiative of adoption always lay with the adoptive
father, who thus supplied his lack of natural offspring and satisfied
the claims of affection and religion, and the desire to exercise
paternal authority or to perpetuate his family. The process and
conditions of adoption varied with different peoples. Among oriental
nations it was extended to slaves (as Moses), who thereby gained their
freedom; but in Greece and Rome it was, with rare exceptions, limited to
citizens.

B. Greek In Greece a man might during his lifetime, or by will, to take
effect after his death, adopt any male citizen into the privileges of
his son, but with the invariable condition that the adopted son accepted
the legal obligations and religious duties of a real son.

C. Roman In Rome the unique nature of paternal authority (patria
potestas), by which a son was held in his father’s power, almost as a
slave was owned by his master, gave a peculiar character to the process
of adoption. For the adoption of a person free from paternal authority
(sui juris), the process and effect were practically the same in Rome as
in Greece (adrogatio). In a more specific sense, adoption proper
(adoptio) was the process by which a person was transferred from his
natural father’s power into that of his adoptive father; and it
consisted in a fictitious sale of the son, and his surrender by the
natural to the adoptive father.

## II. Paul's Doctrine

As a Roman citizen the apostle would naturally know of the Roman custom;
but in the cosmopolitan city of Tarsus, and again on his travels, he
would become equally familiar with the corresponding customs of other
nations. He employed the idea metaphorically much in the manner of
Christ’s parables; and, as in their case, there is danger of pressing
the analogy too far in its details. It is not clear that he had any
specific form of adoption in mind when illustrating his teaching by the
general idea. Under this Figure he teaches that God, by the
manifestation of His grace in Christ, brings men into the relation of
sons to Himself, and communicates to them the experience of sonship.

A. Liberty (Galatians) In Galatians Paul emphasizes especially the
liberty enjoyed by those who live by faith, in contrast to the bondage
under which men are held who guide their lives by legal ceremonies and
ordinances, as the Galatians were prone to do (5:1). The contrast
between law and faith is first set forth on the field of history, as a
contrast between both the pre-Christian and the Christian economies
(3:23f), although in another passage he carries the idea of adoption
back into the covenant relation of God with Israel (Rom. 9:4). But here
the historical antithesis is reproduced in the contrast between men who
now choose to live under law and those who live by faith.

Here three figures seem to commingle in the description of man’s
condition under legal bondage—that of a slave, that of a minor under
guardians appointed by his father’s will, and that of a Roman son under
the patria potestas (Gal. 4:1–3). The process of liberation is first of
all one of redemption or buying out (Gk exagorásē) (4:5). This term in
itself applies equally well to the slave who is redeemed from bondage,
and the Roman son whose adoptive father buys him out of the authority of
his natural father. But in the latter case the condition of the son is
not materially altered by the process: he only exchanges one paternal
authority for another. If Paul for a moment thought of the process in
terms of ordinary Roman adoption, the resulting condition of the son he
conceives in terms of the more free and gracious Greek or Jewish family
life. Or he may have thought of the rarer case of adoption from
conditions of slavery into the status of sonship. The redemption is only
a precondition of adoption, which follows upon faith, and is accompanied
by the sending of “the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba,
Father,” and then all bondage is done away (4:5–7).

B. Deliverance from Debt (Romans) In Rom. 8:12–17 the idea of obligation
or debt is coupled with that of liberty. Man is thought of as at one
time under the authority and power of the flesh (8:5), but when the
Spirit of Christ comes to dwell in him, he is a debtor no longer to the
flesh but to the Spirit (vv 12f), and debt or obligation to the Spirit
is itself liberty. As in Galatians, man thus passes from a state of
bondage into a state of sonship which is also a state of liberty. “For
as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these [and these only] are sons
of God” (v 14). The spirit of adoption or sonship stands in diametrical
opposition to the spirit of bondage (v 15). And the Spirit to which we
are debtors and by which we are led, at once awakens and confirms the
experience of sonship within us (v 16). In both places, Paul conveys
under this figure the idea of man as passing from a state of alienation
from God and of bondage under law and sin, into that relation with God
of mutual confidence and love, of unity of thought and will, which
should characterize the ideal family, and in which all restraint,
compulsion, and fear have passed away.

## III. The Christian Experience

As a fact of Christian experience, the adoption is the recognition and
affirmation by man of his sonship toward God. It follows upon faith in
Christ, by which man becomes so united with Christ that His filial
spirit enters into him, and takes possession of his consciousness, so
that he knows and greets God as Christ does (cf. Mk. 14:36).

A. In Relation to Justification It is an aspect of the same experience
that Paul describes elsewhere, under another legal metaphor, as
justification by faith. According to the latter, God declares the sinner
righteous and treats him as such, admits him to the experience of
forgiveness, reconciliation, and peace (Rom. 5:1). In all this the
relation of father and son is undoubtedly involved, but in adoption it
is emphatically expressed. It is not only that the prodigal son is
welcomed home, glad to confess that he is not worthy to be called a son,
and willing to be made as one of the hired servants, but he is embraced
and restored to be a son as before. The point of each metaphor is, that
justification is the act of a merciful judge setting the prisoner free,
but adoption is the act of a generous father, taking a son to his bosom
and endowing him with liberty, favor, and a heritage.

B. In Relation to Sanctification Besides, justification is the beginning
of a process which needs for its completion a progressive course of
sanctification by the aid of the Holy Spirit, but adoption is
coextensive with sanctification. The sons of God are those led by the
Spirit of God (Rom. 8:14), and the same Spirit of God gives the
experience of sonship. Sanctification describes the process of general
cleansing and growth as an abstract process, but adoption includes it as
a concrete relation to God, as loyalty, obedience, and fellowship with
an ever loving Father.

C. In Relation to Regeneration Some have identified adoption with
regeneration, and therefore many Fathers and Roman Catholic theologians
have identified it with baptismal regeneration, thereby excluding the
essential fact of conscious sonship. The new birth and adoption are
certainly aspects of the same totality of experience; but they belong to
different systems of thought, and to identify them is to invite
confusion. The new birth defines especially the origin and moral quality
of the Christian experience as an abstract fact, but adoption expresses
a concrete relation of man to God. Nor does Paul here raise the question
of man’s natural and original condition. It is pressing the analogy too
far to infer from this doctrine of adoption that man is by nature not
God’s son. It would contradict Paul’s teaching elsewhere (e.g., Acts
17:28), and he should not be convicted of inconsistency on the
application of a metaphor. He conceives man outside Christ as morally an
alien and a stranger from God, and the change wrought by faith in Christ
makes him morally a son and conscious of his sonship; but naturally he
is always a potential son because God is always a real father.

## IV. As God’s Act

Adoption as God’s act is an eternal process of His gracious love, for He
“foreordained us unto adoption as sons through Jesus Christ unto
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will” (Eph. 1:5).

A. Divine Fatherhood The motive and impulse of Fatherhood which result
in adoption were eternally real and active in God. In some sense He had
bestowed the adoption upon Israel (Rom. 9:4). “Israel is my son, my
first-born” (Ex. 4:22; cf. Dt. 14:1; 32:6; Jer. 31:9; Hos. 11:1). God
could not reveal Himself at all without revealing something of His
Fatherhood, but the whole revelation was as yet partial and prophetic.
When “God sent forth his Son” to “redeem them that were under the law,”
it became possible for men to receive the adoption; for to those who are
willing to receive it, He sent the Spirit of the eternal Son to testify
in their hearts that they are sons of God, and to give them confidence
and utterance to enable them to call God their Father (Gal. 4:5f; Rom.
8:15).

B. Its Cosmic Range But this experience also is incomplete, and looks
forward to a fuller adoption in the response, not only of man’s spirit,
but of the whole creation, including man’s body, to the Fatherhood of
God (Rom. 8:23). Every filial spirit now groans, because it finds itself
imprisoned in a body subjected to vanity, but it awaits a redemption of
the body, perhaps in the resurrection, or in some final consummation,
when the whole material creation shall be transformed into a fitting
environment for the sons of God, the creation itself delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of
God (Rom. 8:21). Then will adoption be complete, when man’s whole
personality shall be in harmony with the spirit of sonship, and the
whole universe favorable to its perseverance in a state of blessedness.

See also: [Children of God](children-of-god.html).

**Bibliography.**—comms inloc, esp W. Sanday on Romans (ICC, 14th ed
1913) and J. B. Lightfoot on Galatians (1900); RTWB (R. H. Fuller);
TDNT, VIII, sv υἱοθεσία (Wülfing von Martitz, Schweizer).

T. Rees

