---
title: Angels
layout: lesson
---


**Angels 9**

**Introduction**

Theologians have often viewed angels as a very difficult
subject.<sup>**[<sup>1</sup>](#sdfootnote1sym)**</sup> Why? Because,
while there is abundant mention of angels in the Bible, the nature of
this revelation is without the same kind of explicit description we
often find with other subjects developed in Scripture:

Every reference to angels is incidental to some other topic. They are
not treated in themselves. God’s revelation never aims at informing us
regarding the nature of angels. When they are mentioned, it is always in
order to inform us further about God, what he does, and how he does it.
Since details about angels are not significant for that purpose, they
tend to be omitted.<sup>**[<sup>2</sup>](#sdfootnote2sym)**</sup>

Though theologians have been cautious in their study of angels we have
been bombarded in recent years by what could easily be called
*Angelmania*. In fact, this is the title of an article by Dr. Kenneth
Gangel in “Kindred Spirit” on the widespread discussion and fascination
with angels in our time by the secular
world.<sup>**[<sup>3</sup>](#sdfootnote3sym)**</sup> Gangel writes,

In his 1990 book, *Angels: An Endangered Species*, Malcolm Godwin
estimates that over the last 30 years one in every ten pop songs
mentions an angel. But that was just romantic fun.

Now our culture takes angels seriously, if not accurately. In the last
few years *Time, Newsweek, Ladies’ Home Journal, Redbook,* and a host of
other popular magazines have carried articles about angels. In mid-1994,
ABC aired a two-hour, prime time special titled “Angels: the Mysterious
Messengers.” In *Newsweek’s*November 28, 1994 issue an article titled
“In Search of the Sacred” observed that “20% of Americans have had a
revelation from God in the last year, and 13% have seen or sensed the
presence of an angel” (p. 54).

*Newsweek* is right; modern society, so seemingly secular and hopelessly
materialistic, desperately searches for some spiritual and supernatural
meaning. If angels can provide it, then angels it will
be.<sup>**[<sup>4</sup>](#sdfootnote4sym)**</sup>

The bookstores abound with books on this subject. These books not only
claim encounters with angels, but instruct people on how to contact
them. We now have a weekly program on one of the major networks entitled
“Touched By An Angel.” Certainly, one might argue, this is just a story
for entertainment. However, this show not only demonstrates our
fascination with this topic, but a illustrates a very poor grasp of what
the Bible really teaches about angels and about God along with some very
definite distortions of Scripture. By these comments I do not mean to
discount all the so-called encounters with angels that we occasionally
read or hear about. Why? Because, as will be discussed in more detail
later, angels are servants of God and described by the author of Hebrews
as, “ministering spirits, sent out to render service for the sake of
those who will inherit salvation?” See also Psalm 91:11 and Matthew
4:11. So certainly, for those who believe the record of Scripture, we
can trust completely in the Bible’s teaching on angels and, “with a
perhaps lesser degree of certainty, consider the personal accounts of
reputable Christians.” <sup>**[<sup>5</sup>](#sdfootnote5sym)**</sup>

A good illustration of the latter can be found in an article by Sue
Bohlin entitled, “The Good, The Bad, and The Ugly.” She writes:

I was about thirteen years old when I had my first encounter with an
angel. I was going upstairs to my room, pulling my entire weight on the
handrail, when it suddenly came off in my hand. I fell backwards, head
first. Halfway into a terrible fall, I felt a strong hand on my back
push me upright. There was nobody there—well, nobody *visible*!

Angel stories are always fascinating, and in this essay I address
angels: the good, the bad, and the ugly. The good angels are the holy
ones, the bad angels are the evil ones, which the Bible calls demons,
and the ugly angels are demons disguising themselves as good angels.
These ugly angels have deceived many people in a culture that has
embraced “angel mania.” <sup>**[<sup>6</sup>](#sdfootnote6sym)**</sup>

While many details about angels are omitted in the Bible, it is
important to keep in mind three important elements about the biblical
revelation God has given us.

(1) The mention of angels is inclusive in Scripture. Depending on the
Bible translation searched, these celestial beings are referred to from
294 to 305 times in the Bible. References to angels occur at least 116
times in the Old Testament and 175 times in the New Testament.

(2) These many references are found in at least 34 books from the very
earliest books (whether Job or Genesis) to the last book of the Bible
(Revelation).

(3) Finally, there are numerous references to angels by the Lord Jesus,
whom Scripture declares to be the creator of all things, which includes
angelic beings. Paul wrote, “For by Him all things were created, *both*
in the heavens and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or
dominions or rulers or authorities (a reference to angels)—all things
have been created by Him and for Him” (Col. 1:16).

It is out of the this extended body of Scripture that the study
presented here will be developed. The Bible will be the authority for
this study and not the speculations of men nor their experiences nor
what people think sounds logical.

A Simple Definition
===================

Angels are spiritual beings created by God to serve Him, though created
higher than man. Some, the good angels, have remained obedient to Him
and carry out His will, while others, fallen angels, disobeyed, fell
from their holy position, and now stand in active opposition to the work
and plan of God.

The Nature of Angels
====================

Angels are created beings
-------------------------

**The fact of their creation** is brought out in Psalm 148. There the
psalmist calls upon all in the celestial heavens, including the angels,
to praise God. The reason given is, “For He commanded and they were
created” (Ps. 148:1-5).

**The time of their creation** is never stated, however, we know they
were created before the creation of the world. From the book of Job we
are told that they were present when the earth was created (Job 38:4-7)
so their creation was prior to the creation of the earth as described in
Genesis one.

**The agent of their creation** is specifically stated to be Christ as
the One who created all things (cf. John 1:1-3 with Col.
1:16).<sup>**[<sup>7</sup>](#sdfootnote7sym)**</sup>

**The nature of their creation** is as a host or a company,
simultaneously. Unlike human beings and the animal kingdom created in
pairs and who procreate, angels were created simultaneously as a
company, a countless host of myriads (Col. 1:16; Neh 9:6). This is
suggested by the fact they are not subject to death and they do not or
were not to propagate. They are nevertheless an innumerable host created
before the creation of the earth (cf. Job. 38:7; Neh. 9:6; Ps 148:2, 5;
Heb 12:22; Dan 7:10; Matt 26:53; Rev. 5:11; with Matt. 22:28-30; Luke
20:20-36).

Angels are spirit creatures
---------------------------

(1) Angels are ***spirit beings***. Though at times they have been given
the ability to reveal themselves in the form of human bodies as in
Genesis 18:3, they are described as “spirits” in Hebrews 1:14. This
suggests they do not have material bodies as we do. Hence, they do not
function as human beings in terms of marriage and procreation (Mark
12:25) nor are they subject to death (Luke 20:36).

Mankind, including our incarnate Lord, is “lower than the angels” (Heb.
2:7). Angels are not subject to the limitations of man, especially since
they are incapable of death (Luke 20:36). Angels have greater wisdom
than man (2 Sam. 14:20), yet it is limited (Matt. 24:36). Angels have
greater power than man (Matt. 28:2; Acts 5:19; 2 Pet. 2:11), yet they
are limited in power (Dan. 10:13).

Angels, however, have limitations compared to man, particularly in
future relationships. Angels are not created in the image of God,
therefore, they do not share man’s glorious destiny of redemption in
Christ. At the consummation of the age, redeemed man will be exalted
above angels (1 Cor. 6:3).<sup>**[<sup>8</sup>](#sdfootnote8sym)**</sup>

This also means they are not omnipresent. They cannot be everywhere at
once.

(2) All angels were created ***holy***, without sin, and in a state of
perfect holiness.

Originally all angelic creatures were created holy. God pronounced His
creation good (Gen. 1:31), and, of course, He could not create sin. Even
after sin entered the world, God’s good angels, who did not rebel
against Him, are called holy (Mark 8:38). These are the elect angels (1
Tim. 5:21) in contrast to the evil angels who followed Satan in his
rebellion against God (Matt.
25:41).<sup>**[<sup>9</sup>](#sdfootnote9sym)**</sup>

(3) As created beings, they are ***mere*** ***creatures***. They are not
divine and are not to be worshipped (see Rev. 19:10; 22:9). As a
separate order of creatures, they are both distinct from human beings
and higher than humans with powers far beyond our abilities in this
present age (1 Cor. 6:3; Heb. 1:14; 2:7). But as creatures they are
limited in their powers, knowledge, and activities (1 Peter 1:11-12;
Rev. 7:1). Like all of creation, angels are under God’s authority and
subject to His judgment (1 Cor. 6:3; Matt. 25:41).

The Types of Angels   
(Good and Evil)
======================

While all the angels were originally created holy and without sin, there
was a rebellion by Satan, who, being lifted up by his own beauty, sought
to exalt himself above God and rebelled. In his rebellion, he took with
him one-third of the angels (Rev. 12:4). This rebellion and fall is
probably described for us in Isaiah 14:12-14 and Ezekiel 28:15 embodied
in the kings of Babylon and
Tyre.<sup>**[<sup>10</sup>](#sdfootnote10sym)**</sup> Prophesying of a
future angelic conflict that will occur in the middle of the
Tribulation, John wrote, “And there was war in heaven, Michael and his
angels waging war with the dragon. And the dragon and his angels waged
war” (Rev. 12:7). In other words, there are good angels and there are
evil angels.

As is clear from Revelation 12:7 and many other passages, the leader of
these fallen angels (or demons as they are also called) is Satan (cf.
Matt. 12:25-27). Satan, the leader of unholy angels, is a liar, a
murderer, and a thief (John 10:10). As God’s great antagonist, He hates
God and God’s people. Scripture teaches us that he prowls about like a
roaring lion in search of those whom he may devour by his nefarious
schemes (1 Peter 5:8). As an angelic being, Satan, along with his
demon-like angels who operate under his authority, is supernaturally
powerful and brilliant, and he uses all his powers against humanity. Not
only is he a liar, a thief, and a distorer, but that which characterizes
him above all else is deception. John describes him as the one “who
deceives the whole world” (John 12:9). In his cunning, he disguises
himself as an angel of light (2 Cor. 11:14). So, in view of this, the
Apostle Paul wrote, “Therefore it is not surprising if his servants also
disguise themselves as servants of righteousness . . .” (2 Cor. 11:15).
More will be said on this below.

The Ministry of Good Angels
===========================

The good and loyal angels are the mighty servants of God who constantly
serve him always doing His will. The Psalmist described them as, “Bless
the LORD, you His angels, Mighty in strength, who perform His word,
Obeying the voice of His word! Bless the LORD, all you His hosts, You
who serve Him, doing His will” (Ps. 103:20-21). It is no wonder, then,
that the author of Hebrews, in showing the superiority of Christ to even
the mighty angels, asked (the question here demands a positive answer
both in the Greek text and contextually), “Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent out to render service for the sake of those who will
inherit salvation?” (Heb. 1:14). The answer is “Yes!” Though God can
always act independently without the use of agents, He has chosen to use
both angelic and human instruments to accomplish His will. In keeping
with this, over and over again in the Bible, we find angels acting as
God’s servants involved in variegated ministry to people.

Angels Protect
--------------

Perhaps no aspect of their ministry to man is more talked about than the
idea of a “guardian angel.” Over the years, I have often been asked,
“Does everyone have a guardian angel?” While no passage specifically
states that every person has a guardian angel, the Bible does teach that
angels do guard or protect as Psalm 91:11 declares. In addition, Matthew
18:10 may suggest a guardian angel because of the statement Christ made
regarding little children when He said, “See that you do not despise one
of these little ones, for I say to you, that their angels in heaven
continually behold the face of My Father who is in heaven.” But it
should also be pointed out that Psalm 91:11 is directed to those who
make the Lord their refuge.

The psalmist explained that **no harm** or **disaster** can **befall**
those who have made **theLord** their **refuge** (mah£seh, “shelter from
danger”; . . . ) because He has commissioned **angels** to care for
them. angels protect from physical harm and give believers strength to
overcome difficulties, pictured here as wild lions and dangerous snakes.
Satan, in tempting Christ, quoted 91:11-12 (Matt. 4:6), which shows that
even God’s most marvelous promises can be foolishly
applied.<sup>**[<sup>11</sup>](#sdfootnote11sym)**</sup>

Some would claim that this Old Testament passage should not be applied
in modern times, but the author of Hebrews does not seem to draw that
distinction. That they are ministering spirits who minister to the
saints is presented as a general truth of the Bible and should not be
restricted to Bible times. Also, Scripture suggests that Michael, the
archangel, is particularly involved in ministry to Israel. Concerning
the reference to Michael in Daniel 10:13, Ryrie writes:

Michael, which means “who is like God?” (v. 21; 12:1; Jude 9; Rev.
12:7), is the special guardian of the affairs of Israel (12:1) and is
designated the archangel (Jude 9). One of the chief princes shows a
hierarchy among the angels (cf. Eph. 1:21). *I had been left there with
the kings of Persia*. The good angel (cf. vv. 5-6), with Michael’s help,
was left in a place of preeminence in influencing Persia. But the battle
between good and evil angels over the control of nations continues (see
v. 20 and Rev. 20:3).

Regarding accounts of angelic protection, Dr. Kenneth Gangel gives the
following account which is similar to others I have heard about,
especially with missionaries:

A veteran missionary friend of mine (now retired) tells the story about
a woman missionary alone on a compound in northern Africa during a riot
by one of the local tribes. She hid in a closet and prayed as warriors
advanced along the dusty road toward the houses where the white
intruders lived. Amazingly, she never heard them. No one ever entered
her building, and there was no evidence of any turmoil. My friend
learned later that the warriors, who intended to kill everyone at the
missionary compound and burn it to the ground, instead retreated when
they found the compound guarded by tall warriors dressed in white and
carrying large swords. Angels?

Another and similar account was also reported by a medical missionary at
his home church in Michigan:

While serving at a small field hospital in Africa, I traveled every two
weeks by bicycle through the jungle to a nearby city for supplies. This
required camping overnight half way. On one of these trips, I saw two
men fighting in the city. One was seriously injured, so I treated him
and witnessed to him of the Lord Jesus Christ. I then returned home
without incident.

Upon arriving in the city several weeks later, I was approached by the
man I had treated earlier. He told me he had known that I carried money
and medicine. He said, “some friends and I followed you into the jungle
knowing you would camp overnight. We waited for you to go to sleep and
planned to kill you and take your money and drugs. Just as we were about
to move into your campsite, we saw that you were surrounded by 26 armed
guards.”

I laughed at this and said I was certainly all alone out in that jungle
campsite. The young man pressed the point, “No, sir, I was not the only
one to see the guards. My Jave friends also saw them and we all counted
them. It was because of those guards that we were afraid and left you
alone.”

At this point in the church presentation in Michigan, one of the men in
the church jumped up and interrupted the missionary, and asked, “Can you
tell me the exact date when this happened?” The missionary thought for a
while and recalled the date.

The man in the congregation told this side of the story: “On that night
in Africa it was morning here. I was preparing to play golf. As I put my
bag in the car, I felt the Lord leading me to pray for you. In fact, the
urging was so strong that I called the men of this church together to
pray for you. Will all of those men who met with me that day please
stand?”

The men who had met that day to pray together stood—there were 26 of
them!

Again we ask, were these angels? While I cannot verify this story, I
have no doubt whatsoever that it could be true.

Angels Provide
--------------

As angels were sent by God to provide sustenance for the Lord at the end
of his forty days in the wilderness (Matt. 4:1-11), so he has
undoubtedly on occasion done so for believers in our day. Some would
include the provision of bread and water for Elijah (1 Kings 19:5-6),
but this was a ministry of “the Angel of the Lord” which could simply
mean, angel sent from the Lord, but it’s probably best to understand
this as a reference a theophany, a manifestation of God to
Elijah.<sup>**[<sup>12</sup>](#sdfootnote12sym)**</sup>

As an illustration of possible angelic provision, Sue Bohlin gives the
following account:

In 1944, the penniless wife of a pastor and evangelist in Switzerland,
Susie Ware prayed, “God, I need five pounds of potatoes, two pounds of
pastry flour, apples, pears, a cauliflower, carrots, veal cutlets for
Saturday, and beef for Sunday.” A few hours later, someone knocked on
the door, and there was a young man carrying a basket, who said, “Mrs.
Ware, I am bringing what you asked for.” It was precisely what she’d
prayed for—down to the exact brand of pastry flour she wanted. The young
man slipped away, and even though Rev. and Mrs. Ware watched at the
window to their building, the man never exited. He just disappeared
(Anderson, Joan Wester. *Where Angels Walk*, New York: Ballantine Books,
1992, pp. 60-62).<sup>**[<sup>13</sup>](#sdfootnote13sym)**</sup>

My wife’s sister, Connie Griffith, had an experience about 15 years ago
which is recorded in Jodie Berndt’s book*, Celebration of
Miracles*.<sup>**[<sup>14</sup>](#sdfootnote14sym)**</sup> Connie, and
her husband Geoff, were missionaries in Africa working with Hindu people
and had an opportunity to visit missionaries in India. The trip involved
a 38-hour train ride from New Delhi to an orphanage in the south. They
had been warned not to eat the food on the train, but they had taken
very little food with them and Connie was so famished she decided to
take her chances. She ate some curried mutton, and was soon extremely
ill.

After arriving at the orphanage, Connie went to bed where she remained
for three days. Geoff was traveling during that time and the
missionaries thinking she was reacting to the miserable poverty of their
surroundings thought she didn’t want to be bothered and left her alone.
It was not until it was time to move on to the next orphanage that they
realized she was desperately ill. They realized she needed to get to a
hospital fast so they set out for the nearest one which was three hours
away. About fifteen minutes into the ride Connie’s muscles began to
cramp. First her fingers then her knees and toes curled inward and her
facial muscles contracted so she was unable to speak. Finally she found
herself paralyzed as the jeep bounced along the primitive road.

They were concerned, thinking she might not make it because she was so
dehydrated. Geoff cried out to God, “please do a miracle! Do
*something*!” Suddenly the missionary who was driving spotted a small
Red Cross building just off the trail. As the jeep pulled to a stop,
Connie tried to protest. She was concerned about the rampant AIDS
epidemic in these remote areas and the practice of reusing needles. As
the group made their way into the building which was well lit and very
clean, an Indian man, dressed in white shirt and baggy pants, greeted
them in perfect English. He said, “I know what’s wrong with her. She’s
dehydrated. I have some electrolytes here in this packet. This water has
already been boiled.” He mixed the electrolytes with the water and
handed Geoff an eye dropper encased in a plastic bag. “It’s sterile,” he
said, looking right at Connie.

Geoff was given instructions to put one drop at a time in Connie’s mouth
(which had locked open) until they reached the hospital. When they
reached the hospital an hour-and-a-half later, her muscles had relaxed
and she was able to walk into the hospital. The doctor said it was the
worst case of dehydration he’d ever seen. Her body had literally sucked
the water out of the cells and she’d come within hours of dying.

A few weeks later, after returning to Africa, they received a letter
from the missionary couple in India. They said, “You won’t believe this,
but when we returned to our village via the route we had taken to get
you to the hospital, that Red Cross building was gone. There was nothing
there in the place where it was.” Was this the work of one of God’s
ministering spirits? One day we will know, but in the meantime, we can
certainly give praise to the Lord.

Angels Proclaim God’s Truth
---------------------------

Throughout the Bible we find angels involved in communicating God’s
truth or message as the Spirit of God directed them. This is, of course,
is very much in keeping with the basic meaning of the word angel. Both
the Hebrew word for angel (*mal\`ak*,) and the Greek word
(*aggelos,*pronounced *angelos*) mean “messenger.” In a number of
passages we are told that angels were instruments God used to reveal His
Word (cf. Acts 7:38, 53; Gal. 3:19; Heb. 2:2). But that is only half the
story. Numbers of times they appeared to announce an important message.
They announced the birth of John the Baptist and Jesus (Luke 1:11f, 26f;
Matt. 1:20f). In the Tribulation, God will use them to announce key
events (cf. Rev. 14:6). Today, however, God’s canon of Scripture, the
Bible, is complete. Beware, therefore, of anyone claiming to have new
revelation as given by an angel or of anyone claiming to be an angel
with new revelation. Remember, Satan is a deceiver with his own angels
of deceit promoting false doctrine (2 Cor. 11:1-4, 12-13; 1 Tim. 4:1).

Angels Punish or Carry Out God’s Judgments
------------------------------------------

With their enormous God-given power, they can carry out anything God
sends them to do. It is no wonder then that we find them as vital agents
in pouring out the awful judgments of the Tribulation as described in
Revelation and even in doing battle with Satan and his evil angels to
restrict them from any access to heaven, confining them to the realm of
this earth and its immediate atmosphere in the middle of the Tribulation
(Rev. 12:7f). This will be done in anticipation of Satan’s bondage and
final defeat as described in Revelation 12 and 20.

But such is not the picture we find in our modern day fascination with
angels. As Gangel writes, “I doubt that many figurines of punishing
angels found their way into gift boxes last Christmas, but the Bible
doesn’t hesitate to describe this part of their activity.”
<sup>**[<sup>15</sup>](#sdfootnote15sym)**</sup>

### Final Thoughts on the Ministry of Angels

Surely it is comforting to know that God may protect, provide, and
encourage us is supernatural ways, but this does always guarantee such
deliverance and certainly and we should never presume on this provision
of God. So having consider the various ways angels minister, we should
keep in mind that God does not always deliver us from danger or supply
our needs in such miraculous ways whether by angels or by His direct
intervention. For His own sovereign purposes in His plan for using
suffering (a tool of growth, to manifest the character of Christ, to
witness to others, etc.), the opposite is sometimes His will, as life
clearly illustrates and Scripture declares (see Heb. 11:36-40).

The Deception of Evil, Fallen Angels
====================================

Just as people usually do not think of the punitive ministry of angels,
so here is another area that is completely ignored by the popular ideas
of angels, but that it is ignored is not without reason. The reason lies
in Satan’s deception and in the vacuum of man’s heart as he seeks
answers apart from God and His revelation of Himself and His plan of
salvation as it is revealed in the Bible. As the arch deceiver and
antagonist to God, the church, and mankind as whole, Satan is the master
of disguise. It is clearly his masquerade as an angel of light with his
servant angels ,who also disguise themselves in one way or another, that
are behind the current *Angelmania* in our society today. As Bohlin
points out:

. . . there are many books, publications, and seminars that are filled
with demonic deception of the ugliest kind. Because when you start
talking to angels, you end up dealing with
demons.<sup>**[<sup>16</sup>](#sdfootnote16sym)**</sup>

Sue Bohlin has an excellent discussion of what to look for to discern
the activity of these demonic, evil angels. She writes:

You know you’re around “ugly angels,” or demons masquerading as angels
of light and holiness, when you see or hear these terms:

1. Contacting or communing with angels.

There are now books available with titles like *Ask Your Angels*
(Daniel, Alma, Timothy Wyllie, and Andrew Ramer, *Ask your Angels*, New
York: Ballantine, 1992) and *100 Ways to Attract Angels*(Sharp, Sally,
*100 Ways to Attract Angels*, Minnesota: Trust Publications, 1994). But
the Bible gives neither permission nor precedent for contacting angels.
When people start calling on angels, it’s not the holy angels who
answer. They’re demons, disguising themselves as good angels to people
who don’t know how to tell the difference.

2. Loving our angels, praying to our angels.

Some self-styled “angel experts” instruct their followers to love their
angels and call upon them for health, healing, prosperity, and guidance.
But angels are God’s servants, and all this attention and emphasis and
glory should go to God, not His servants. God says, “I will not share my
glory with another” (Isaiah 42:8). Scripture makes no mention of loving
angels—only God, His word, and people. And it never tells us to pray to
angels, only to the Lord Himself.

3. Instruction, knowledge, or insight from angels, particularly ones
with names.

Some angel teachers are proclaiming that angels are trying very hard to
contact us, so they can give us deeper knowledge of the spiritual (Karyn
Martin-Kuri, in an interview with *Body, Mind and Spirit* Journal,
May/June 1993. Also, Albright, Naomi, *Angel Walk*, Tuscaloosa, Alabama:
Portals Press, 1990). Invariably, this “angel knowledge” is a mixture of
truth and lies, and never stands up to the absolute truth of Scripture.

There are four angel names that keep popping up in the angel literature:
Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, and Raphael. Michael and Gabriel are the only
angels mentioned by name in the Bible. The other two show up in the
apocryphal *First Book of Enoch*, which includes a fanciful account of
the actions of these four beings. Those who report modern day angel
teachings are actually channeling information from demons.

4. Special knowledge or teachings from angels.

Naomi Albright distributes teachings about the deep meanings of colors,
and numbers and letters of the alphabet which she claims is “knowledge
given from above and brought forth in more detail by the High Angelic
Master Sheate, Lady Master Cassandra, and Angel Carpelpous, and the
Master Angel, One on High.” (*Paths of Light* newsletter, Angel Walk
F.O.L., Followers of Light, No. 24, July 1994, p. 6-10). These same
beings told Mrs. Albright to stress two main teachings: first, that God
accepts all religions, and second, Reincarnation.(Albright, *Angel
Walk*, p. 77-78). These two teachings keep showing up in much of the New
Age angel literature, which shouldn’t be surprising since they are
heretical lies that come from the pit of hell, which is where the angel
teachers are from.

Other angel teachings are that all is a part of God (pantheism); the
learner is set apart from others by the “deep” knowledge that the angels
give (this is a basic draw to the occult); and that eventually, the one
who pursues contact with these angels will be visited by an Ascended
Master or a Shining Angel (which is a personal encounter with a demon).

We need to remember that God’s angels are not teachers. God’s word says
they are messengers—that’s what “angel” means—and they minister to us.
God has revealed to us everything we need for life and godliness (2
Peter 1:3), so any hidden knowledge that spirit beings try to impart is
by nature occultic and demonic.

5. Human divinity

The message of the ugly angels is that we need to recognize that we are
one with the divine, we are divine. . . we are God. In Karen Goldman’s
*The Angel Book: A Handbook for Aspiring Angels*, she says things like,
“Angels don’t fall out of the sky; they emerge from within.” (Goldman,
Karen, *The Angel Book—A Handbook for Aspiring Angels*, New York: Simon
& Shuster, 1988, p. 20). And, “The whole purpose in life is to know your
Angel Self, accept it and be it. In this way we finally experience true
oneness.” (Ibid., p. 95).

The following bit of heretical garbage was channeled from a demon posing
an angel named Daephrenocles: “The wondrous light of the Angels, from
the Elohim to the Archangels to the Devas and Nature Spirits, are all
bringing to you the realization that you are magnificent—you are divine
**now** and divine first.” (*These Celestial Times* newsletter, Vol. 3,
No. 1, Gaithersburg, Maryland, p. 4).

Much of the angel literature refers to “the angel within.” But angels
are a separate part of the creation. They were created before man as a
different kind. They are not within us. The movie “It’s a Wonderful
Life” notwithstanding, when we hear a bell ring it does not mean that an
angel is getting his wings. Nor do good people, especially children,
become angels when they die. We remain human beings—not angels, and
certainly not God.

What our culture needs in response to the angel craze is strong
discernment built on the foundation of God’s word. We need to remember,
and share with others, three truths about angels:

1. The ministry of holy angels will never contradict the Bible.

2. The actions of holy angels will always be consistent with the
character of Christ.

3. A genuine encounter with a holy angel will glorify God, not the
angel. Holy angels never draw attention to themselves. They typically do
their work and disappear.

It’s very true that many have “entertained angels unaware” (Hebrews
13:2). But we need to make sure we’re entertaining the right kind of
angels!<sup>**[<sup>17</sup>](#sdfootnote17sym)**</sup>

Some Warnings   
(Things to Do and Not to Do)
============================

In addition to the above warnings and in view of the deceptions of
Satan, we need to be on our guard. In this regard, here are a number of
things that I would like to suggest.

Never Worship Angels
--------------------

As pointed out in the introduction to this study, everywhere we find
angels mentioned in the Bible, the reference to angels is incidental to
some other issue. They are not the primary subject of the passage. God’s
love and grace is. When they are mentioned, it is always in order to
inform us further about God, what He does, and how He does it. This very
fact should teach us that not only are angels not the focus, but they
should certainly not be worshipped.

In two places in the book of Revelation, John was so awed by the
revelation he had received from God through an angel, a very glorious
creature, that he bowed down to worship the angel.

Revelation 19:10 And I fell at his feet to worship him. And he said to
me, “Do not do that; I am a fellow servant of yours and your brethren
who hold the testimony of Jesus; worship God. For the testimony of Jesus
is the spirit of prophecy.”

And then again in Revelation 22 we are told:

Revelation 22:8-9And I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things.
And when I heard and saw, I fell down to worship at the feet of the
angel who showed me these things. 9 And he said to me, “Do not do that;
I am a fellow servant of yours and of your brethren the prophets and of
those who heed the words of this book; worship God.”

We told not to worship angels, but why? First, they are but “fellow
servants” with believers called upon to serve the Lord. Then he was told
to “worship God.” Angels are powerful and awesome in many ways, but,
like us, they are only creatures and servants of the living God who
alone deserves our worship. This means we don’t pray to them or trust in
them, even though God may use them as our guardian. Our trust is to be
in God, not angels. They minister at His bidding.

Remember, the church at Colossae had been invaded by false teachers who
were teaching a false humility and the worship of angels, claiming
special mystic insights by way of visions in connection with their
worship of angels (Co. 2:18). This was demonic because it was usurping
the preeminent place and sufficiency of Christ as Savior and Lord. The
claim was, He is not enough for salvation and spirituality. What you
need is to worship angels, etc.

Do Not Participate in Angel Gimmickry
-------------------------------------

Closely associated with the worship of angels, but in a more subtle way,
is all the angel gimmickry going on in our culture today. Sometimes this
is not just a matter of collecting and enjoying angel figurines much as
someone would collect and enjoy figurines and pictures of eagles.
Regarding this, Gangel has a word of advice:

Of course there is nothing wrong with enjoying angel figurines on the
coffee table as long as they do not become icons that somehow replace
our dependence upon God’s Word and the role of the indwelling Holy
Spirit in our lives.<sup>**[<sup>18</sup>](#sdfootnote18sym)**</sup>

Do Not Become Critical of the Reports of Angels
-----------------------------------------------

When we hear of reports of angels, it is only natural for us to be
skeptical, but and there is the need for a certain amount of skepticism,
what Gangel calls “healthy skepticism.” The reasons a healthy skepticism
is needed are the deceptions of Satan referred above and the spiritually
bankrupt condition of our culture and its willingness to accept anything
but the truth.

The gullibility of people today is due in part to pendulum swings of
society. Society had swung from the gross mystical speculations of the
middle ages to the rationalism of the late 1800s and early 1900s. Now
due in part to the failure of rationalism, the vacuum that naturally
occurs in the minds of people, and the rise of demonism and the occult
in these last days, the pendulum has swung back to mysticism seen so
prominently in the New Age movement, the occult, and in the cults. So
belief in Satan, demons and angels is more and more common place, not
because people are believing the Bible, but because of the rise of their
spiritual emptiness. Angels have become an easy substitute, a handy
compromise to the reality of the Living God as He is revealed in
Scripture.

When asked “Do you believe in angels?” Jamal Mashburn, star forward of
the Dallas Mavericks, responded, “Yes. For me it is like an inner voice
that tells me what to do and what not to do, where to go and where not
to go. It’s somebody like God that protects and cares for me” (*Dallas
Morning News*, 18 December 1994). Why not? God seems so distant and
austere. Angels seem so
friendly.<sup>**[<sup>19</sup>](#sdfootnote19sym)**</sup>

On the other hand, angels are the ministering spirits of God and He can
send them to anyone whom he pleases. I have never seen an angel or had
an experience where I was sure an angel was involved, but I do believe
many reports are true.

A good friend of ours who has gone through a whole series of very
difficult health problems told me last Sunday that at one point he was
so low that he’d given up hope of ever getting well again. During the
night a nurse came into his hospital room to check his IV and she said
to him, “You seem to be really down and are without hope, aren’t you?”
He responded with, “Yes, I am.” She knelt down, took his hand, and
prayed for him. Afterward, his spirits picked up and he quickly began to
improve physically. He never saw this nurse again, though he asked about
her and watched for her. He told his doctor about this, who happened to
be a Christian, and he asked my friend if he had considered that this
might have been an angel. Was this angel? Perhaps. We simply don’t know,
but it certainly could be.

In addition, we need to avoid the critical spirit that questions and
belittles the claims of others, especially those who do not know the
Scripture. Laughing at or belittling their claims will only close the
door to opportunities to witness and point them to the truth of the
Gospel and the Bible.

Some Positive Things to Do
--------------------------

First, when confronted with claims of angels about which we are
skeptical, let us seek ways to use these claims to show interest in the
person and to engage them in discussion about the realities of the
Savior or the truths of God’s Word.

Second, let’s be thankful to God for the ministry of angels and for
those reports that do not contradict Scripture and may very well be
genuine cases of angelic ministry. Even though we may not be able to
validate that it was an angel, we can and should certainly praise God
for the aid or encouragement experienced, as with my friend in the
hospital.

Finally, let’s know what the Bible teaches about God, Jesus Christ,
salvation, true spirituality, and the ministry of angels that we might
not fall for the satanic counterfeits that seek to cause people to
bypass the sufficiency of the person and work of Jesus Christ. The book
of Colossians is an excellent commentary on this.

Gangel closes his article on angels with the following fitting comment:

So you’ve never seen or heard an angel? Be patient—I guarantee it will
happen. Like John we’ll all someday see and hear “the voice of many
angels, numbering thousands upon thousands, and ten thousand times ten
thousand.” With them we will praise the Savior singing, “Worthy is the
Lamb, who was slain, to receive power and wealth and wisdom and strength
and honor and glory and praise!” (Rev.
5:11-12).<sup>**[<sup>20</sup>](#sdfootnote20sym)**</sup>

Angelology: The Doctrine of Angels
==================================

Introduction
============

The fact that God has created a realm of personal beings other than
mankind is a fitting topic for systematic theological studies for it
naturally broadens our understanding of God, of what He is doing, and
how He works in the universe.

We are not to think that man is the highest form of created being. As
the distance between man and the lower forms of life is filled with
beings of various grades, so it is possible that between man and God
there exist creatures of higher than human intelligence and power.
Indeed, the existence of lesser deities in all heathen mythologies
presumes the existence of a higher order of beings between God and man,
superior to man and inferior to God. This possibility is turned into
certainty by the express and explicit teaching of the Scriptures. It
would be sad indeed if we should allow ourselves to be such victims of
sense perception and so materialistic that we should refuse to believe
in an order of spiritual beings simply because they were beyond our
sight and touch.<sup>**[<sup>21</sup>](#sdfootnote21sym)**</sup>

The study of angels or the doctrine of *angelology* is one of the ten
major categories of theology developed in many systematic theological
works. The tendency, however, has been to neglect it. As Ryrie writes,

One has only to peruse the amount of space devoted to angelology in
standard theologies to demonstrate this. This disregard for the doctrine
may simply be neglect or it may indicate a tacit rejection of this area
of biblical teaching. Even Calvin was cautious in discussing this
subject (*Institutes*, I, xiv,
3).<sup>**[<sup>22</sup>](#sdfootnote22sym)**</sup>

Though the doctrine of angels holds an important place in the Word of
God, it is often viewed as a difficult subject because, while there is
abundant mention of angels in the Bible, the nature of this revelation
is without the same kind of explicit description we often find with
other subjects developed in the Bible:

Every reference to angels is incidental to some other topic. They are
not treated in themselves. God’s revelation never aims at informing us
regarding the nature of angels. When they are mentioned, it is always in
order to inform us further about God, what he does, and how he does it.
Since details about angels are not significant for that purpose, they
tend to be omitted.<sup>**[<sup>23</sup>](#sdfootnote23sym)**</sup>

While many details about angels are omitted, it is important to keep in
mind three important elements about the biblical revelation God has
given us about angels.

(1) The mention of angels is inclusive in Scripture. In the NASB
translation these celestial beings are referred to 196 times, 103 times
in the Old Testament and 93 times in the New Testament.

(2) Further, these many references are scattered throughout the Bible
being found in at least 34 books from the very earliest books (whether
Job or Genesis) to the last book of the Bible (Revelation).

(3) Finally, there are numerous references to angels by the Lord Jesus,
who is declared to be the Creator of all things, which includes the
angelic beings. Paul wrote, “For by Him all things were created, *both*
in the heavens and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or
dominions or rulers or authorities (a reference to angels)—all things
have been created by Him and for Him.”

So while the mention of angels may seem incidental to some other subject
contextually, it is an important element of divine revelation and should
not be neglected, especially in view of the present craze and many
misconceptions about angels. It is out of this extended body of
Scripture, therefore, that the doctrine of angels, as presented in this
study, will be developed. The objective is to make the Bible our
authority rather than the speculations of men or their experiences or
what may sound logical to people.

Though theologians have been cautious in their study of angels, in
recent years we have been bombarded by what could easily be called
*Angelmania*. In “Kindred Spirit” Dr. Kenneth Gangel has written an
article on the widespread discussion and fascination with angels even by
the secular world which he entitled,
*Angelmania*.<sup>**[<sup>24</sup>](#sdfootnote24sym)**</sup> Gangel
writes,

In his 1990 book *Angels: An Endangered Species*, Malcolm Godwin
estimates that over the last 30 years one in every ten pop songs
mentions an angel. But that was just romantic fun.

Now our culture takes angels seriously, if not accurately. In the last
two years *Time, Newsweek, Ladies’ Home Journal, Redbook,* and a host of
other popular magazines have carried articles about angels. In mid-1994,
ABC aired a two-hour, prime time special titled “Angels: the Mysterious
Messengers.” In *Newsweek’s*November 28, 1994 issue an article titled
“In Search of the Sacred” observed that “20% of Americans have had a
revelation from God in the last year, and 13% have seen or sensed the
presence of an angel” (p. 54).

*Newsweek* is right; modern society, so seemingly secular and hopelessly
materialistic, desperately searches for some spiritual and supernatural
meaning. If angels can provide it, then angels it will be. Certainly
they are more cheerful and brighter than our long-standing infatuation
with movies about demons and evil spirits, along with endless Dracula
revivals<sup>**[<sup>25</sup>](#sdfootnote25sym)**</sup>

The bookstores abound with books on angels and many claim encounters
with angels. One of the major networks has a popular program entitled
“Touched By An Angel.” Certainly, this is just a story to entertain, but
it does illustrate our fascination with this topic. In addition, it
illustrates the very poor grasp of what the Bible really teaches about
angels and about God. By these comments I do not mean to discount all
the so-called encounters with angels that we occasionally read or hear
about. Why? Because, as will be discussed in more detail later, angels
are servants of God, described by the author of Hebrews as, “ministering
spirits, sent out to render service for the sake of those who will
inherit salvation.” See also Psalm 91:11 and Matthew 4:11. So certainly,
due to the inspired and inerrant character of Scripture, we can trust
completely in the Bible’s teaching on angels and, “with a perhaps lesser
degree of certainty, consider the personal accounts of reputable
Christians.”<sup>**[<sup>26</sup>](#sdfootnote26sym)**</sup>

There is an important question that needs to be asked. Why all the
fascination of our culture with angels? First, there is always a bent in
man for the miraculous or supernatural, for that which lifts him out of
the mundane and pain of life, even if for a moment, but there is more to
this issue. The interest in angels is due in part to pendulum swings of
society. In the past, society had swung from the gross mystical
speculations of the middle ages to the rationalism of the late 1800s and
early 1900s. Now, due in part to the failure of rationalism and
materialism to give answers and meaning to life, the emptiness of man’s
heart along with the futility of his pursuits has given rise to his
interest in the mystical, in the supernatural, and in the spiritual. The
tragedy is that our culture continues to pursue this independently of
God’s revelation, the Bible. The pendulum has swung back to mysticism as
it is seen so prominently in the New Age movement, the occult, and in
the cults. So belief in Satan, demons, and angels is more and more
common place today and used as a substitute for a relationship with God
through Christ. This predisposition is not because people are believing
the Bible, but because of the rise of occult phenomena and the futility
of life without God (see Eph. 2:12 and 4:17-19).

A Simple Definition
===================

Angels are spiritual beings created by God to serve Him, though created
higher than man. Some, the good angels, have remained obedient to Him
and carry out His will, while others, fallen angels, disobeyed, fell
from their holy position, and now stand in active opposition to the work
and plan of God.

The Terms Used of Angels
========================

General Terms
-------------

### Angel

Though other words are used for these spiritual beings, the primary word
used in the Bible is *angel*. Three other terms undoubtedly referring to
angels are *seraphim* (Isa. 6:2), *cherubim* (Ezek. 10:1-3), and
*ministering spirits*, which is perhaps more of a description than a
name (Heb. 1:13). More will be said on this later when dealing with the
classification of angels.

The Hebrew word for angel is *mal\`ach*, and the Greek word is
*angelos*. Both words mean “messenger” and describe one who executes the
purpose and will of the one whom they serve. The context must determine
if a human messenger is in view, or one of the celestial beings called
“angels,” or if it is being used of the second Person of the Trinity as
will be discussed below. The holy angels are messengers of God, serving
Him and doing His bidding. The fallen angels serve Satan, the god of
this world (aiwn, “age”) (2 Cor. 4:4).

Illustrations of uses that do not refer to celestial beings:

(1) For human messengers from one human to another (Luke 7:24; Jam.
2:25).

(2) For human messengers bearing a divine message (Hag. 1:13; Gal.
4:14).

(3) For an impersonal agent, Paul’s thorn in the flesh described as “a
messenger of Satan” (2 Cor. 12:7).

(4) For the messengers of the seven churches (Rev. 2-3). It is also used
in connection with the seven churches of Asia, “To the angel of the
church in …” Some take this to mean a special messenger or delegation to
the church as a teaching elder, others take it to refer to a guardian
angel.

Thus, the term *angelos* is not only a generic term, pertaining to a
special order of beings (i.e., angels), but it is also descriptive and
expressive of their office and service. So when we read the word “angel”
we should think of it in this way.

### Holy Ones

The unfallen angels are also spoken of as “holy ones” (Ps. 89:5, 7). The
reason is twofold. First, being the creation of a holy God, they were
created perfect without any flaw or sin. Second, they are called holy
because of their purpose. They were “set apart” by God and for God as
His servants and as attendants to His holiness (cf. Isa. 6).

### Host

“Host” is the Hebrew *tsaba*, “army, armies, hosts.” It is a military
term and carries the idea of warfare. Angels are referred to as the
“host,” which calls our attention to two ideas. First, it is used to
describe God’s angels as the “armies of heaven” who serve in the army of
God engaged in spiritual warfare (Ps. 89:6, 8; 1 Sam. 1:11; 17:45).
Second, it calls our attention to angels as a multitude of heavenly
beings who surround and serve God as seen in the phrase “Lord of hosts”
(Isa. 31:4). In addition, *tsaba* sometimes includes the host of
heavenly bodies, the stars of the universe.

Difficult Terms
---------------

### Sons of God

In their holy state, unfallen angels are called “sons of God” in the
sense that they were brought into existence by the creation of God (Job
1:6; 38:7). Though they are never spoken of as created in the image of
God, they may also be called “sons of God” because they possess
personality like God. This will be demonstrated later in this study.
This term is also used in Genesis 6:2 which tells us the “sons of God”
took wives from among the “daughters of men.” Some scholars understand
“the sons of God” of Genesis 6:2 to refer to the sons of the godly line
of Seth and the “daughters of men” to refer to the ungodly line of the
Cainites. Others, in keeping with the use of “sons of God” in Job,
believe the term refers to fallen angels who mated with the daughters of
men to produce an extremely wicked and powerful progeny that led to the
extreme wickedness of Noah’s day. Most who hold to this latter view find
further support in 2 Peter 2:4-6 and Jude
6-7.<sup>**[<sup>27</sup>](#sdfootnote27sym)**</sup> Still others
believe they refer to despots, powerful rulers. Ross writes:

The incident is one of hubris, the proud overstepping of bounds. Here it
applies to “the sons of God,” a lusty, powerful lot striving for fame
and fertility. They were probably powerful rulers who were controlled
(indwelt) by fallen angels. It may be that fallen angels left their
habitation and inhabited bodies of human despots and warriors, the
mighty ones of the
earth.<sup>**[<sup>28</sup>](#sdfootnote28sym)**</sup>

### The Angel of the Lord

The second difficulty concerns the identity of “the angel of the Lord”
as it is used in the Old Testament. A careful study of the many passages
using this term suggests that this is no ordinary angel, but a
Theophany, or better, a Christophany, a preincarnate appearance of
Christ. The angel is identified as God, speaks as God, and claims to
exercise the prerogatives of God. Still, in some passages He
distinguishes Himself from Yahweh (Gen. 16:7-14; 21:17-18; 22:11-18;
31:11-13, Ex. 3:2; Judg. 2:1-4; 5:23; 6:11-22; 13:3-22; 2 Sam. 24:16;
Zech. 1:12; 3:1; 12:8). That the Angel of the Lord is a Christophany is
suggested by the fact a clear reference to “the Angel of the Lord”
ceases after the incarnation. References to an angel of the Lord in Luke
1:11; and 2:8 and Acts 5:19 lack the Greek article which would suggest
an ordinary angel.

The Origin, Nature, and Number of Angels
========================================

Angels Are Created Beings
-------------------------

### The Fact of Their Creation

That angels are created beings and not the spirits of departed or
glorified human beings is brought out in Psalm 148. There the Psalmist
calls on all in the celestial heavens, including the angels, to praise
God. The reason given is, “For He commanded and they were created” (Ps.
148:1-5). The angels as well as the celestial heavens are declared to be
created by God.

Since God is Spirit (John 4:24) it is natural to assume that there are
created beings who more closely resemble God than do the mundane
creatures who combine both the material and immaterial. There is a
material kingdom, an animal kingdom, and a human kingdom; So it may be
assumed, there is an angelic or spirit kingdom. However, Angelology
rests not upon reason or supposition, but upon
revelation.<sup>**[<sup>29</sup>](#sdfootnote29sym)**</sup>

### The Time of Their Creation

Though the exact time of their creation is never stated, we know they
were created before the creation of the world. From the book of Job we
are told that they were present when the earth was created (Job 38:4-7)
so their creation was prior to the creation of the earth as described in
Genesis one.

### The Agent of Their Creation

Scripture specifically states that Christ, as the one who created all
things, is the creator of angels (cf. John 1:1-3 with Col. 1:16).

The Son’s Creation includes “all” things in heaven and on earth, visible
and invisible. These indicate the *entire*universe, both material and
immaterial. A highly organized hierarchy of angelic beings is referred
to with the word “thrones” (*qronoi*), “powers” (*kuriothtes*), “rulers”
(*arcai*), and “authorities” (*exousiai*). This not only indicates a
highly organized dominion in the spirit world of angels, but shows that
Paul was writing to refute an incipient form of Gnosticism that promoted
the worship of angels in place of the worship of Christ (cf. Col. 2:18).
In this, Paul demonstrates superiority and rightful place of worship as
supreme (cf. Eph. 1:21; 3:10; 6:12; Phil. 2:9-10; Col. 2:10,
15).<sup>**[<sup>30</sup>](#sdfootnote30sym)**</sup>

### The Nature and Number of Their Creation

The angels were created simultaneously as a host or a company. God
created man and the animal kingdom in pairs with the responsibility and
ability to procreate. Angels, however, were created simultaneously as a
company, a countless host of myriads (Col. 1:16; Neh. 9:6). This is
suggested by the fact they are not subject to death or any form of
extinction and they do not propagate or multiply themselves as with
humans. Hebrews 9:27 says, “… it is appointed for men to die once and
after this *comes* judgment.” While fallen angels will be judged in the
future and permanently confined to the lake of fire (Matt. 25:41; 1 Cor.
6:4; 2 Pet. 2:4; Jude 6), there is never any mention of the death of
angels (see Luke 20:36). Nevertheless, they are an innumerable host
created before the creation of the earth (cf. Job 38:7; Neh. 9:6; Ps.
148:2, 5; Heb. 12:22; Dan. 7:10; Matt. 26:53; Rev. 5:11; with Matt.
22:28-30; Luke 20:20-36).

Angels Are Spirit Beings
------------------------

### Their Abode

Statements like, “the angels which are in heaven” (Mark 13:32) and “an
angel from heaven” suggest that angels have fixed abodes or centers for
their activities. However, due to the ministry and abilities given to
them in the service of God, they have access to the entire universe.
They are described as serving in heaven and on earth (cf. Isa. 6:1f;
Dan. 9:21; Rev. 7:2; 10:1).

Though fallen angels seem to have an abode other than heaven itself, no
specific location is given except that Satan will be bound in the
“Abyss” for the thousand years after the Second Coming before he is
released (Rev. 20:3). Likewise the plague which seems to be demonic is
spoken of as coming from the Abyss (9:1-30). Fallen angels also have a
king who is referred to as “the angel of the Abyss” (vs. 11). The
destiny of fallen angels is the lake of fire (Matt. 25:41). The holy
angels will dwell in the new heavens and new earth described in
Revelation 21-22.<sup>**[<sup>31</sup>](#sdfootnote31sym)**</sup>

The reference to “the Abyss” brings up another important element
regarding the abode of the fallen angels. Ryrie writes:

The Scriptures clearly indicate two groups of fallen angels, one
consisting of those who have some freedom to carry out Satan’s plans,
and the other who are confined. Of those who are confined, some are
temporarily so, while others are permanently confined in Tartarus (2
Peter 2:4 and Jude 6). The Greeks thought of Tartarus as a place of
punishment lower than hades. *Those temporarily confined are in the
abyss* (Luke 8:31; Rev. 9:1-3, 11), some apparently consigned there to
await final judgment while others will be loosed to be active on the
earth (vv. 1-3, 11, 14;
16:14).<sup>**[<sup>32</sup>](#sdfootnote32sym)**</sup> (emphasis mine)

Jude also speaks of an abode for angels:

Jude 1:6 And angels who did not keep their own domain, but abandoned
their proper abode, He has kept in eternal bonds under darkness for the
judgment of the great day.

While the meaning of this passage is debated, it does show us that
angels not only have a domain or area of authority assigned to them, but
a dwelling place.

The most likely reference here is to the angels (“sons of God,” cf. Gen.
6:4; Job 1:6; 2:1) who came to earth and mingled with women. This
interpretation is expounded in the pseudepigraphical Book of Enoch (7,
9.8, 10.11; 12.4), from which Jude quotes in v. 14, and is common in the
intertestamental literature and the early church fathers (e.g., Justin
Apology 2.5). These angels “did not keep their positions of authority”
(*ten heauton archen*). The use of the word *arche* for “rule,”
“dominion,” or “sphere” is uncommon but appears to be so intended here
(cf. BAG, p. 112). The implication is that God assigned angels
stipulated responsibilities (*arche*, “dominion”) and a set place
(*oiketerion*). But because of their rebellion, God has kept or reserved
(*tetereken* perfect tense) these fallen angels in darkness and in
eternal chains awaiting final judgment. Apparently some fallen angels
are in bondage while others are unbound and active among mankind as
demons.<sup>**[<sup>33</sup>](#sdfootnote33sym)**</sup>

### Their Immaterialness

Though at times they have revealed themselves in the form of human
bodies (angelophanies) as in Genesis 18:3, they are described as
“spirits” in Hebrews 1:14. This suggests they do not have material
bodies as humans do. This is further supported by the fact they do not
function as human beings in terms of marriage and procreation (Mark
12:25) nor are they subject to death (Luke 20:36).

Mankind, including our incarnate Lord, is “lower than the angels” (Heb.
2:7). Angels are not subject to the limitations of man, especially since
they are incapable of death (Luke 20:36). Angels have greater wisdom
than man (2 Sam. 14:20), yet it is limited (Matt. 24:36). Angels have
greater power than man (Matt. 28:2; Acts 5:19; 2 Pet. 2:11), yet they
are limited in power (Dan. 10:13).

Angels, however, have limitations compared to man, particularly in
future relationships. Angels are not created in the image of God,
therefore, they do not share man’s glorious destiny of redemption in
Christ. At the consummation of the age, redeemed man will be exalted
above angels (1 Cor.
6:3).<sup>**[<sup>34</sup>](#sdfootnote34sym)**</sup>

Millard Erickson writes:

That angels are spirits may also be inferred from the following
considerations:

Demons (fallen angels) are described as spirits (Matt. 8:16; 12:45; Luke
7:21; 8:2; 11:26; Acts 19:12; Rev. 16:14).

We are told that our struggle is not against “flesh and blood, but
against the principalities, against the powers, against the world rulers
of this present darkness, against the spiritual hosts of wickedness in
heavenly places” (Eph. 6:12).

Paul, in Colossians 1:16, seems to identify the heavenly forces as
invisible.

That angels are spirits seems to follow (although not necessarily from
Jesus’ assertions that angels do not marry (Matt. 22:30) and do not die
(Luke 20:36).<sup>**[<sup>35</sup>](#sdfootnote35sym)**</sup>

Angels, though spirit beings and very powerful, are not omnipotent,
omniscient, nor omnipresent. They cannot be everywhere at once.

### Their Appearance

Since they are spirit beings, they are usually not seen, unless God
gives the ability to see them or unless they manifest themselves. Balaam
could not see the angel standing in his way until the Lord opened his
eyes (Num. 22:31) and Elisha’s servant could not see the host of angels
surrounding him until Elisha prayed for his eyes to be opened (2 Kings
6:17). When angels have been seen as recorded in Scripture, they were
often mistaken as men because they were manifested in a man-like
appearance (Gen. 18:2, 16, 22; 19:1, 5, 10, 12, 15, 16; Judg. 13:6; Mark
16:5; Luke 24:4). Sometimes, they appear in a way that either manifests
God’s glory (Luke 2:9; 9:26) or in some form of brilliant apparel (cf.
Matt. 28:3; John 20:12; Acts 1:10 with Ezek. 1:13; Dan. 10:6).
Consistently, they have appeared as real men, never as ghosts, or as
winged animals (cf. Gen. 18:2; 19:1; Mark 16:3; Luke 24:4).

They are occasionally pictured in other forms and in other
manifestations as with wings, and as a combination of man, beast, and
birds as in Ezekiel 1:5f and Isaiah 6:6. But apparently such
manifestations only occurred by way of a vision or special revelation
from God. No angel literally appeared in such form.

They also seem to always have appeared as youthful or mature men (Mark
16:5), but never as old men, perhaps because they neither age nor die
(Luke 20:36).

In the present fascination of our culture, previously referred to as
*angelmania*, the common conception of angels is that of winged
creatures and most times as female.

Some of the commonly held conceptions are not supported by the
scriptural witness. There are no indications of angels appearing in
female form. Nor is there explicit reference to them as winged, although
Daniel 9:21 and Revelation 14:6 speak of them as flying. The cherubim
and seraphim are represented as winged (Exod. 25:20; Isa. 6:2), as are
the symbolic creatures of Ezekiel 1:6 (cf. Rev. 4:8). However, we have
no assurance that what is true of cherubim and seraphim is true of
angels in general. Since there is no explicit reference indicating that
angels as a whole are winged, we must regard this as at best an
inference, but not a necessary inference, from the biblical passages
which describe them as
flying.<sup>**[<sup>36</sup>](#sdfootnote36sym)**</sup>

While angels generally appear as men in Scripture, Zechariah 5:9 may
suggest this is not always the case. The two women mentioned in this
passage are not specifically called angels, but they are clearly agents
of God or forces of Satan, like angels, good or evil.

### Their Holiness

All angels were created ***holy***, without sin, and in a state of
perfect holiness.

Originally all angelic creatures were created holy. God pronounced His
creation good (Gen. 1:31), and, of course, He could not create sin. Even
after sin entered the world, God’s good angels, who did not rebel
against Him, are called holy (Mark 8:38). These are the elect angels (1
Tim. 5:21) in contrast to the evil angels who followed Satan in his
rebellion against God (Matt.
25:41).<sup>**[<sup>37</sup>](#sdfootnote37sym)**</sup>

### Their Creatureliness

As created beings, they are of course mere ***creatures***. They are not
divine and their worship is explicitly forbidden (see Col. 2:18; Rev.
19:10; 22:9). As a separate order of creatures, they are both distinct
from human beings and higher than humans with powers far beyond human
abilities in this present age (cf. 1 Cor. 6:3; Heb. 1:14; 2:7). But as
creatures they are limited in their powers, knowledge, and activities (1
Peter 1:11-12; Rev. 7:1). Like all of creation, angels are under God’s
authority and subject to His judgment (1 Cor. 6:3; Matt. 25:41).

Following the revelation given to John, on two occasions the apostle
fell on his face in worship, but the angel quickly told John not to
worship him and then gave the reason. Angels are but “fellow servants”
and called upon to serve God as all God’s creatures should. So John was
told to “worship God.” The worship of angels (as with any other object
of worship) distracts from the worship of God and attributes godlike
powers to the object of worship. Angels are powerful and awesome in many
ways, but, like us, they are only creatures and servants of the living
God who alone deserves our worship. This means we are not to pray to
them or trust in them even though God may use them to minister to our
needs in various ways. Our trust is to be in God, not angels. They
minister to us at His bidding under His authority and power. Though
sometimes the instrument of aid or deliverance was an angel, New
Testament believers recognized it was the Lord who delivered them (see
Acts 12:11).

In Acts 27:23-25, Luke recounted Paul’s experience with an angel who
brought him a message from the Lord, but there was no worship of the
angel. Instead, Paul’s faith was in the God he served.

23 For this very night an angel of the God to whom I belong and whom I
serve stood before me, 24 saying, ‘Do not be afraid, Paul; you must
stand before Caesar; and behold, God has granted you all those who are
sailing with you.’ 25 "Therefore, keep up your courage, men, for I
believe God, that it will turn out exactly as I have been told.

Though writing about their invisibility to mankind, Chafer has an
interesting comment:

One reason angels are rendered invisible to human sight may be that , if
they were seen, they would be worhiped. Man, who is so prone to idolatry
as to worship the works of his own hands, would hardly be able to resist
the worship of angels were they before his
eyes.<sup>**[<sup>38</sup>](#sdfootnote38sym)**</sup>

The church at Colossae had been invaded by false teachers who were
teaching a false humility and the worship of angels as a part of the
means to spirituality. It seems these teachers were claiming special
mystic insights by way of visions in connection with their worship of
angels. Concerning this, Paul wrote:

Colossians 2:18 Do not let anyone who delights in false humility and the
worship of angels disqualify you for the prize. Such a person goes into
great detail about what he has seen, and his unspiritual mind puffs him
up with idle notions (NIV).

The person attempting to make such judgment is described as one “who
delights in false humility and the worship of angels.” The context
suggests that he seeks to impose these things on the Colossians and that
this is the means by which he attempts to disqualify them for their
prize.<sup>**[<sup>39</sup>](#sdfootnote39sym)**</sup>

This was demonic because it was an attempt to usurp the preeminent place
and sufficiency of Christ as Savior and Lord (cf. Col. 2:10). It is no
wonder, then, that the author of Hebrews, in the most extended passage
on angels in the New Testament (Heb. 1:5-29), demonstrates the
superiority of Christ to even the mighty angels (Heb. 1:2-4, 13). In
this he concludes his argument with a question designed to show that
Christ, God’s very Son and the radiance of His glory who sits at God’s
right hand, is superior to angels for he asked, “Are they not all
ministering spirits, sent out to render service for the sake of those
who will inherit salvation?” (Heb. 1:14).

### Their Personalities

There are several qualities common to personality all of which angels
possess—personal existence, intellect, emotion, and will. As
personalities we see them interacted with over and over again through
the Bible. Ryrie writes:

Angels then qualify as personalities because they have these aspects of
intelligence, emotions, and will. This is true of both the good and evil
angels. Good angels, Satan, and demons possess intelligence (Matt. 8:29;
2 Cor. 11:3; 1 Peter 1:12). Good angels, Satan, and demons show emotions
(Luke 2:13; James 2:19; Rev. 12:17). Good angels, Satan, and demons
demonstrate that they have wills (Luke 8:28-31; 2 Tim. 2:26; Jude 6).
Therefore, they can be said to be persons. The fact that they do not
have human bodies does not affect their being personalities (any more
than it does with God).<sup>**[<sup>40</sup>](#sdfootnote40sym)**</sup>

The fallen angels are even described by actions of personality like
lying and sinning (John 8:44; 1 John 3:8-10). Some have considered
angels, including Satan, as merely the abstract personification of good
and evil, but such is not at all in keeping with the teaching of
Scripture.

### Their Abilities and Powers

**Their Knowledge:**Jesus said, “But of that day and hour no one knows,
not even the angels of heaven, nor the Son, but the Father alone” (Matt.
24:36). This comment by the Lord suggest two things: (1) The phrase,
“not even the angels” implies that angels have superhuman knowledge, but
(2) the main statement of this verse shows they are limited in their
knowledge, they are not omniscient. That their knowledge is greater is
also suggested by the fact they were present at some of the heavenly
counsels, were involved in conveying revelation (Gal. 3:19), and were
used of God to interpret visions as with Daniel and Zechariah.

Ryrie suggests three reasons for their superior knowledge:

(1) Angels were created as a higher order of creatures in the universe
than humans are. Therefore, innately they possess greater knowledge. (2)
Angels study the Bible more thoroughly than some humans do and gain
knowledge from it (James 2:19; Rev. 12:12). (3) Angels gain knowledge
through long observation of human activities. Unlike humans, angels do
not have to study the past; they have experienced it. Therefore, they
know how others have acted and reacted in situations and can predict
with a greater degree of accuracy how we may act in similar
circumstances. The experiences of longevity give them greater
knowledge.<sup>**[<sup>41</sup>](#sdfootnote41sym)**</sup>

**Their Strength:** Since man is created lower than the angels with
limitations angels do not have, we would expect them to possess
superhuman strength as well. That angels have greater strength than man
is evident from at least two considerations:

**(1) Specific Statements in Scripture:** Scripture specifically speaks
of their greater power. Psalm 103:20 at least implies their greater
strength in the statement, “Bless the Lord, O you his angels, you mighty
ones who do his word.” Then, 2 Thessalonians 1:7 refers to the return of
the Lord with His mighty angels in flaming fire. Further, 2 Peter 2:11
reads, “whereas angels who are greater in might and power do not bring a
reviling judgment against them before the Lord.” The only question here
is who is being compared? The major subject of the context is that of
the false teachers (humans beings), however, due to verse 10, some
believe the comparison is being made between the “angelic majesties” of
verse 10, good angels and evil angels. If so, then the verse is stating
that the good angels are more powerful than the evil ones.

**(2) Their Activities as Described in Scripture:**Though their great
power is always a derived power from God, the mighty works they
accomplish, as in the execution of God’s judgments, demonstrate their
superhuman strength (cf. 2 Chron. 32:21; Acts 12:7-11; and the many
references to angelic activities in Revelation). In this regard,
Elisha’s confidence and prayer for his servant to see the myriad of
angels surrounding them in the face of the human forces, suggests their
greater power (2 Kings 6:15-17). His confidence was certainly not simply
in their greater numbers. Illustrations of their power are seen in Acts
5:19; 12:7, 23; Matthew 28:2 (the stone rolled away by the angel weighed
about 4 tons).

The Psalmist exclaimed, “Blessed be the LORD God, the God of Israel, Who
alone works wonders” (Ps. 72:18). All miraculous power has its source in
God. As angelic creatures, they are subject to the limitations of their
creatureliness. They are mighty, but not almighty. Even Satan, a fallen
angel, with his angelic powers must operate under the permissive will of
God (Job 1:12; 2:6).

### Their Position

#### In Regard to Man

By creation man is lower than the angels (Heb. 2:7-9). Angels are higher
in intelligence, power, and movement, yet angels serve men as
ministering spirits (Heb. 1:14) sent forth to serve the saints
regardless of their high position and power. As mentioned, men are
warned to never worship angels for they are only creatures.

Today believers are experientially lower than the angels, yet
positionally higher because of their union in Christ (cf. Eph 1:20-22;
with Eph 2:4-6 and Heb 2:9). Christians share Christ’s seat at God’s
right hand. One day, however, believers will be both positionally and
experientially higher and will judge angels (1 Cor 6:3). This
undoubtedly refers to some kind of governmental direction believers will
have over angels.

#### With Reference to Christ

By His essential nature and being, Christ is higher because He is God
the Creator (cf. Heb 1:4ff with Col. 1:15-17). By Christ’s incarnation
He became lower for a little while (Heb 2:9), but this only applied to
His humanity. By Christ’s death, burial, resurrection, and ascension He
became far superior to angels as the last Adam and the second man (cf. 1
Cor. 15:45-48; Eph. 1:20-22; 1 Pet. 3:18-22; Col. 2:15). As the
glorified and exalted God-man He became the last Adam. Adam was the head
of the first race of men, but Christ became the head of the second race
of regenerated men. He is called last because there will never be
another fall, and because He, as the glorified and exalted Savior, is a
life-giving Spirit. As the second man from heaven He is viewed as the
head and beginning of a new and exalted race of people.

The Division of Angels—Good and Evil
====================================

While all the angels were originally created holy and without sin, there
was a rebellion by Satan, who, being lifted up by his own beauty,
rebelled and sought to exalt himself above God. In his rebellion, he
took with him one-third of the angels (Rev. 12:4). This rebellion and
fall is probably described for us in Isaiah 14:12-15 and Ezekiel 28:15
embodied in the kings of Babylon and
Tyre.<sup>**[<sup>42</sup>](#sdfootnote42sym)**</sup> Prophesying of a
future angelic conflict that will occur in the middle of the
Tribulation, John wrote, “And there was war in heaven, Michael and his
angels waging war with the dragon. And the dragon and his angels waged
war” (Rev. 12:7). In other words, there are good angels and there are
evil angels. Regarding their fall, Bushwell writes:

We infer that the angels which sinned did so in full knowledge of all
the issues involved. They chose self-corruption, knowing exactly what
they were doing. They sinned without remedy, and there is no atonement
for them (II Peter 2:4; Jude 6). On the other hand, it seems that the
holy angels, being faced with the same ethical choice and possessing the
same God-given ability to choose, remained and are confirmed in their
state of holiness. They have never known the experience of
sin.<sup>**[<sup>43</sup>](#sdfootnote43sym)**</sup>

As is clear from Revelation 12:7 and many other passages, the leader of
these fallen angels, or demons as they are also called, is Satan (cf.
Matt. 12:25-27). As the leader of these unholy angels, Satan is a liar,
a murderer, and a thief (John 10:10). As God’s great antagonist, Satan
hates God and His people and is constantly on the prowl like a roaring
lion in search of those he may devour by his nefarious schemes (1 Peter
5:8). As an angelic being, Satan, along with his demon-like angels, is
supernaturally powerfully and brilliant, and uses all his powers against
humanity. Not only is he a liar, a thief, and a distorer, but one of his
chief characterizations is deception. John describes him as the one “who
deceives the whole world” (John 12:9). In his cunning, he disguises
himself as an angel of light (2 Cor. 11:14). In view of this, the
Apostle Paul wrote, “Therefore it is not surprising if his servants also
disguise themselves as servants of righteousness …” (2 Cor. 11:15).

The Organization of Angels
==========================

The Fact of Angelic Organization
--------------------------------

While the Bible’s revelation on the organization of angels is rather
meager, it says enough to show us there does seem to be organization in
the angelic world. They appear to be organized into various ranks and
orders and positions. This is suggested by the fact Michael is called
the Archangel or chief angel (Jude 9). Then, in Daniel 10:13 he is
called one of the chief princes. Other ranks and orders are suggested by
the terms used of angels in Ephesians 3:10; 6:12, and 1 Peter 3:22.
Ryrie writes:

The Scriptures speak of the “assembly” and “council” of the angels (Ps.
89:5, 7), of their organization for battle (Rev. 12:7), and of a king
over the demon-locusts (9:11). They are also given governmental
classifications which indicate organization and ranking (Eph. 3:10, good
angels; and 6:12, evil angels). Unquestionably God has organized the
elect angels and Satan has organized the evil angels.

A very important practical point emerges from this. Angels are
organized; demons are organized; yet Christians, individually and in
groups, often feel that it is unnecessary that they be organized. This
is especially true when it comes to fighting evil. Believers sometimes
feel that they can “go it alone” or expect victory without any prior,
organized preparation and discipline. It is also true when it comes to
promoting good. Believers sometimes miss the best because they do not
plan and organize their good
works.<sup>**[<sup>44</sup>](#sdfootnote44sym)**</sup>

This is further supported by Jude’s statement regarding the angels who
left their “domain” (NASB) or “positions of authority” (NIV) in Jude 6.
“Domain” is the Greek arch, which can mean, “domain, rule, authority,”
or “sphere of
influence.”<sup>**[<sup>45</sup>](#sdfootnote45sym)**</sup>

The Classifications of Angels
-----------------------------

Paul Enns provides us with an excellent overview of most of the various
rankings or classifications of the organized angelic world.

***Angels who are governmental rulers.***Ephesians 6:12 refers to
“ranking of fallen angels”: *rulers* are “those who are first or high in
rank”; *powers* are “those invested with authority”; *world-forces of
this darkness*“expresses the power or authority which they exercise over
the world”; *spiritual forces of wickedness*describes the wicked
spirits, “expressing their character and nature.” Daniel 10:13 refers to
the “prince of the kingdom of Persia” opposing Michael. This was not the
king of Persia but rather a fallen angel under Satan’s control; he was a
demon “of high rank, assigned by the chief of demons, Satan, to Persia
as his special area of activity” (cf. Rev. 12:7).

***Angels who are highest ranking.*** Michael is called the
*archangel*in Jude 9 and the great prince in Daniel 12:1. Michael is the
only angel designated archangel, and may possibly be the only one of
this rank. The mission of the archangel is protector of Israel. (He is
called “Michael your prince” in Dan. 10:21.) There were *chief
princes*(Dan. 10:13), of whom Michael was one, as the highest ranking
angels of God. *Ruling angels* (Eph. 3:10) are also mentioned, but no
further details are given.

***Angels who are prominent individuals.*** (1) Michael (Dan. 10:13;
12:1; Jude 9). The name *Michael*means “who is like God?” and identifies
the only one classified as an archangel in Scripture. Michael is the
defender of Israel who will wage war on behalf of Israel against Satan
and his hordes in the Tribulation (Rev. 12:7–9). Michael also disputed
with Satan about the body of Moses, but Michael refrained from judgment,
leaving that to God (Jude 9). Jehovah’s Witnesses and some Christians
identify Michael as Christ; this view, however, would suggest Christ has
less authority than Satan, which is untenable.

(2) Gabriel (Dan. 9:21; Luke 1:26). His name means “man of God” or “God
is strong.” “Gabriel seems to be God’s special messenger of His kingdom
program in each of the four times he appears in the Bible record … He
reveals and interprets God’s purpose and program concerning Messiah and
His kingdom to the prophets and people of Israel.” In a highly
significant passage, Gabriel explained the events of the seventy weeks
for Israel (Dan. 9:21–27). In Luke 1:26–27 Gabriel told Mary that the
One born to her would be great and rule on the throne of David. In
Daniel 8:15–16 Gabriel explained to Daniel the succeeding kingdoms of
Medo-Persia and Greece as well as the untimely death of Alexander the
Great. Gabriel also announced the birth of John the Baptist to Zacharias
(Luke 1:11–20).

(3) Lucifer (Isa. 14:12) means “shining one” or “star of the morning.”
He may have been the wisest and most beautiful of all God’s created
beings who was originally placed in a position of authority over the
cherubim surrounding the throne of God.

***Angels who are divine attendants.*** (1) *Cherubim* are “of the
highest order or class, created with indescribable powers and beauty …
Their main purpose and activity might be summarized in this way: they
are proclaimers and protectors of God’s glorious presence, His
sovereignty, and His holiness.” They stood guard at the gate of the
Garden of Eden, preventing sinful man from entering (Gen. 3:24); were
the golden figures covering the mercy seat above the ark in the Holy of
Holies (Exod. 25:17–22); and attended the glory of God in Ezekiel’s
vision (Ezek. 1). Cherubim had an extraordinary appearance with four
faces—that of a man, lion, ox, and eagle. They had four wings and feet
like a calf, gleaming like burnished bronze. In Ezekiel 1 they attended
the glory of God preparatory for judgment.

(2) *Seraphim*, meaning “burning ones,” are pictured surrounding the
throne of God in Isaiah 6:2. They are described as each having six
wings. In their threefold proclamation, “holy, holy, holy” (Isa. 6:3),
it means “to recognize God as extremely, perfectly holy. Therefore, they
praise and proclaim the perfect holiness of God. The seraphim also
express the holiness of God in that they proclaim that man must be
cleansed of sin’s moral defilement before he can stand before God and
serve Him.”<sup>**[<sup>46</sup>](#sdfootnote46sym)**</sup>

Regarding the governmental rulers in the angelic world, Ryrie described
this as follows:

1.*Rulers or principalities.* These words, used seven times by Paul,
indicate an order of angels both good and evil involved in governing the
universe (Rom. 8:38; Eph. 1:21; 3:10; 6:12; Col. 1:16; 2:10, 15).

2.*Authorities or powers.* This likely emphasizes the superhuman
authority of angels and demons exercised in relation to the affairs of
the world (Eph. 1:21; 2:2; 3:10; 6:12; Col. 1:16; 2:10, 15; 1 Peter
3:22).

3.*Powers.* This word underscores the fact that angels and demons have
greater power than humans (2 Peter 2:11). See Ephesians 1:21 and 1 Peter
3:22.

4.*Place of rule.* In one place demons are designated as world rulers of
this darkness (Eph. 6:12).

5*. Thrones or dominions.* This designation emphasizes the dignity and
authority of angelic rulers in God’s use of them in His government (Eph.
1:21; Col. 1:16; 2 Peter 2:10; Jude
8).<sup>**[<sup>47</sup>](#sdfootnote47sym)**</sup>

Some question whether the Seraphim and Cherubim are actually angels
since they are never clearly identified as angels, but due to the nature
of angels and their service as superhuman servants of God, this is the
most logical place to classify them. It would be helpful to also
consider Ryrie’s explanation of these angelic beings:

***Cherubim*****:**Cherubim constitute another order of angels,
evidently of high rank since Satan was a cherub (Ezek. 28:14, 16). They
seem to function as guardians of the holiness of God, having guarded the
way to the tree of life in the Garden of Eden (Gen. 3:24). The use of
cherubim in the decoration of the tabernacle and temple may also
indicate their guarding function (Ex. 26:1ff.; 36:8ff.; 1 Kings
6:23-29). They also bore the throne-chariot which Ezekiel saw (Ezek.
1:4-5; 10:15-20). Some also identify the four living ones of Revelation
4:6 as cherubim, though others feel these represent the attributes of
God. Representations of the cherubim will also be a part of the
millennial temple (Ezek. 41:18-20).

***Seraphim*****:** All we know about this rank of angelic beings is
found in Isaiah 6:2, 6. Apparently the seraphim were an order similar to
the cherubim. They acted as attendants at the throne of God and agents
of cleansing. Their duty also was to praise God. Their description
suggests a six-winged humanlike creature. The word may be derived from a
root meaning “to burn” or possibly from a root which means “to be
noble.”<sup>**[<sup>48</sup>](#sdfootnote48sym)**</sup>

Three other classification of angels remain:

1.  **Elect Angels:** In 1 Timothy 5:21, Paul speaks of “the elect
    angels.” These are the holy angels who are somehow included in the
    elect purposes of God. These are angels who did not follow after
    Satan in his rebellion. There is little revealed about their
    election, but apparently there was a probationary period for the
    angelic world and these, being the elect of God, remained faithful
    and are confirmed in their holy state in the service of the Lord. As
    Chafer writes, “The fall of some angels is no more unanticipated by
    God than the fall of man. It may be implied, also that angels have
    passed a period of
    probation.”<sup>**[<sup>49</sup>](#sdfootnote49sym)**</sup>

2.  **The Living Creatures:** These are angelic creatures who seem to be
    involved with revealing the glory of the God of Israel in His
    omniscience, omnipotence, and omnipresence (Ezek. 1:5f; Rev. 4:6;
    6:1). Ezekiel 10:15, 20 reveal them as cherubim. Through the four
    faces, they may also anticipate what God would do to bring salvation
    to man through His Son: (a) The face of the man suggests wisdom,
    compassion, intelligence and pictures Christ’s humanity as the Son
    of man, the special focus found in the gospel of Luke; (b) the face
    of a lion speaks of kingly appearance and pictures Christ as King
    which is Matthew’s emphasis; (c) the face of a bull or ox portrays a
    servant, the emphasis seen in Mark; and (d) the face of an eagle
    speaks of heavenly action and portrays the deity Christ, which is
    John’s emphasis.

3.  **Watchers:** “Watchers” is an Aramaic word which means, “vigilant,
    waking, watchful.” Verse 17 may infer this is a special type of
    angel (if a special class is intended). It seems to describe holy
    angels who are constantly vigilant to serve the Lord and who watch
    over the rulers of the world and the affairs of men (Dan. 4:13, 17,
    23). The added description, “a holy one” in verse 13 may imply there
    are unholy watchers, i.e., demonic forces who are watching the
    affairs of men and seeking to influence and destroy.

Special Angels
--------------

### Angels Associated With the Tribulation

In Revelation a number of angels are specifically associated with
certain judgments that will be poured out on the earth like the seven
trumpets and the seven last plagues (Rev. 8-9; 16). In addition, some
angels are related to special functions given to them, at least in these
last days. There is the angel who has power over fire (Rev. 14:18), the
angel of the waters (9:11), the angel of the abyss who will bind Satan
(20:1-2).

### Angels Associated With the Church

In Revelation 2-3, each of the seven letters to the seven churches is
addressed to “the angel of the church of …” In addition, they are each
seen to be in the right hand of Christ in the vision of chapter one
(Rev. 1:16, 20). However, since the term for angel means “messenger” and
is also used of men, there is debate over whether these references refer
to angelic beings or to the human leaders of the seven churches. It
could refer to a guardian angel over these churches or to those men who
function in the capacity of teachers of the Word, like the human pastors
or elders.

The Ministry of Angels
======================

The most basic characteristic of the good angels is seen in the way they
are described in Hebrews 1:14 as ministering spirits and in the accounts
of their many and varied activities of ministry as described in
Scripture. Essentially, they function as priestly messengers
(*leitourgika pneumatata*) in the temple-universe of
God.<sup>**[<sup>50</sup>](#sdfootnote50sym)**</sup> From the account of
their activities in the Bible, their service can be summarized as that
of (1) the worship of God (Isa. 6:3; Rev. 4:8), (2) as messengers of God
(Dan. 9:22; Luke 1:11, 26; 2:9; Rev. 1:1), (3) as soldiers in spiritual
combat (Dan. 10:13f; Rev. 12:7), and (4) as ministers to God’s people
(Heb. 1:14). Regarding their activity as ministering spirits, Bushwell
comments:

The question may be asked, if we are not to worship the angels, or in
any way pray to them, what is the value of the doctrine that they are
“ministering spirits”? In answer we can say at least that the Scriptural
teaching in regard to the ministry of the angels is a beautiful
enrichment of our conception of God’s government of the
world.<sup>**[<sup>51</sup>](#sdfootnote51sym)**</sup>

As God’s celestial servants who carry out His purposes, we may observe
that their ministry falls into several different
relationships:<sup>**[<sup>52</sup>](#sdfootnote52sym)**</sup>

***In Relation to God:*** In their service to God, they are seen as
attendants around His throne, waiting to serve Him and do His bidding
(Ps. 103:20; Isa. 6:1f; Job 1:6; 2:1; Rev. 5:11; 8:1f), as worshippers
in praise of Him (Isa. 6:3; Ps. 148:1-2; Heb. 1:6; Rev. 5:12), as
observers who rejoice over what He does (Job 38:6-7; Luke 2:12-13;
15:10), as soldiers in battle with Satan (Rev. 12:7), and as instruments
of His judgments (Rev. 7:1; 8:2).

***In Relation to the Nations:*** In relation to the nation of Israel,
Michael, the archangel, seems to have a very important ministry as their
guardian (Dan. 10:13, 21; 12:1; Jude 9). In relation to other nations,
they watch over rulers and nations (Dan. 4:17) and seek to influence
their human leaders (Dan. 10:21; 11:1). In the Tribulation they will be
the agents God uses to pour out His judgments (see Rev. 8-9 and 16).

***In Relation to Christ:*** with the plan of God centering in the
person of His Son, Jesus Christ, they naturally perform many services
for the Savior.

-   **In relation to His birth**, they predicted it (Matt. 1:20; Luke
    1:26-28) and then announced his birth (Luke 2:8-15). An angel warned
    Joseph to take Mary and the baby Jesus and flee into Egypt (Matt.
    2:13-15), and an angel directed the family to return to Israel after
    Herod died (vv. 19-21).

-   **In relation to His suffering**, angels ministered to Him after His
    temptation (4:11), in His stress in the Garden of Gethsemane (Luke
    22:43), and Jesus said He could have called a legion of angels who
    stood ready to come to His defense if He so desired (Matt. 26:53).

-   **In relation to His resurrection**, an angel rolled away the stone
    from the tomb (28:1-2), angels announced His resurrection to the
    women on Easter morning (vv. 5-6; Luke 24:5-7), and angels were
    present at His ascension and gave instruction to the disciples (Acts
    1:10-11).

-   **In relation to His coming again**, the voice of the archangel will
    be heard at the translation of the church (1 Thess. 4:16), they will
    accompany Him in His glorious return to earth (Matt. 25:31; 2 Thess.
    1:7) and they will separate the wheat from the tares at Christ’s
    second coming (Matt. 13:39-40).

***In Relation to the Unrighteous:*** Angels not only announce and
inflict judgment (Gen. 19:13; Rev. 14:6-7; Acts 12:23; Rev. 16:1), but
they will separate the righteous from the unrighteous (Matt. 13:39-40).

***In Relation to the Church:*** Hebrews 1:14 describes their ministry
as “ministering spirits, sent out to render service for the sake of
those who will inherit salvation.” In this, however, Scripture points to
a number of specific ministries: they bring answers to prayer (Acts
12:5-10), they help in bringing people to the Savior (Acts 8:26; 10:3),
they may encourage in times of danger (Acts 27:23-24), and they care for
God’s people at the time of death (Luke 16:22).

***In Relation to New Epochs:*** Ryrie points out that angels appear to
be unusually active when God institutes a new epoch in the sweep of
history and then outlines this for us:

A. They Joined in Praise When the Earth Was Created (Job 38:6-7)

B. They Were Involved in the Giving of the Mosaic Law (Gal. 3:19; Heb.
2:2)

C. They Were Active at the First Advent of Christ (Matt. 1:20; 4:11)

D. They Were Active During the Early Years of the Church (Acts 8:26;
10:3, 7; 12:11)

E. They Will Be Involved in Events Surrounding the Second Advent of
Christ (Matt. 25:31; 1 Thes.
4:1)<sup>**[<sup>53</sup>](#sdfootnote53sym)**</sup>

Of course, the ministry of angels occurred at other times, but the
question naturally arises, especially in view of our present day
fascination with angels, is there biblical evidence these varied
ministries of angels continue to function in the present age of the
church?

Whether angels continue to function in all these ways throughout the
present age is uncertain. But they did perform these ministries and may
well continue to do so even though we are not aware of them. Of course,
God is not obliged to use angels; He can do all these things directly.
But seemingly He chooses to employ the intermediate ministry of angels
on many occasions. Nevertheless, the believer recognizes that it is the
Lord who does these things whether directly through using angels (notice
Peter’s testimony that the Lord delivered him from the prison though God
actually used an angel to accomplish it, Acts 12:7-10 compared with vv.
11 and 17).

Perhaps an inscription I once saw in an old church in Scotland states
the balance well.

“Though God’s Power Be Sufficient to Govern Us,  
Yet for Man’s Infirmity He appointed His Angels to Watch over
Us.”<sup>**[<sup>54</sup>](#sdfootnote54sym)**</sup>

Hebrews 13:2 reads, “Do not neglect to show hospitality to strangers,
for by this some have entertained angels without knowing it” (NIV).
Entertaining angels unawares brings to mind Abraham (Gen. 18:1ff.) and
Lot (Gen. 19:1ff.), but even this statement does not prove angels
function today as in Old and New Testament times. As Ryrie points out,
‘The word “angel” may refer to superhuman beings (see Gen. 18:1-8 for an
example of such entertaining) or it may refer to a human being who is a
messenger from God (see James 2:25 for an example of such
entertaining).’<sup>**[<sup>55</sup>](#sdfootnote55sym)**</sup>

Perhaps no aspect of their ministry to man is more talked about than the
idea of “a guardian angel.” People often ask, “Does everyone have a
guardian angel?” The concept that every person has a specific guardian
angel is only by implication from the statement that angels do guard or
protect as Psalm 91:11 declares. But this passage is directed to those
who make the Lord their refuge.

The psalmist explained that **no harm** or **disaster** can **befall**
those who have made **theLord** their **refuge** (mah£seh, “shelter from
danger”; …) because He has commissioned **angels** to care for them.
Angels protect from physical harm and give believers strength to
overcome difficulties, pictured here as wild lions and dangerous snakes.
Satan, in tempting Christ, quoted 91:11-12 (Matt. 4:6), which shows that
even God’s most marvelous promises can be foolishly
applied.<sup>**[<sup>56</sup>](#sdfootnote56sym)**</sup>

Some would claim that this Old Testament passage should not be applied
in modern times, but in Hebrews 1:14 the author of Hebrews does not seem
to draw that distinction. That they are ministering spirits who minister
to the saints is presented as a general truth of the Bible and should
not be restricted to Bible times.

Surely it is comforting to know that God may protect, provide, and
encourage us through His angels, but this fact does not always guarantee
such deliverance, and certainly we should never presume on this
provision of God. So having considered the various ways angels minister,
we should keep in mind that God does not always deliver us from danger
or supply our needs in miraculous ways whether by angels or by His
direct intervention. For His own sovereign and wise purposes, the
opposite is sometimes His will as life clearly illustrates and Scripture
declares (see Heb. 11:36-40).

But there is another truth regarding angels that needs to be kept in
view. Just as people usually do not think of the punitive ministry of
angels, so people, in their popular ideas about angels, often ignore the
Scripture’s teaching about the deception of Satan’s evil angels (2 Cor.
11:14-15). That society is ignorant of this is not without reason. The
reason lies in Satan’s deception and in the vacuum of man’s heart as he
continues to seek answers apart from God and Scripture’s revelation of
God and His plan of salvation in Christ. As the arch deceiver and
antagonist to God, to the church, and to mankind as whole, Satan is the
master of disguise. Much of how society thinks today in its enchantment
with angels is clearly a product of his masquerade as an angel of light
with his angels who also disguise themselves in keeping with his
purposes. Investigate what is being written in books and said in
seminars and you will find numerous publications and teaching filled
with what is nothing less than pure demonic deception. For more on this
whole issue as it applies to today’s fascination with angels, see the
study, “Angels, God’s Ministering Spirits” on our web page in the
theology section.

The Watchfulness of Angels
==========================

The Fact of Their Watchfulness
------------------------------

Significantly, a number of passages speak of the angels as observers.
Some are surprised by this truth, but the Bible teaches us that angels
are spectators of God’s activities in the world and that they are
especially keen on observing the unfolding of His plan of redemption.
Since a number of passages specifically address the fact angels are
spectators of what God does, we would be remiss to ignore this biblical
truth for there is certainly a reason and a lesson to be learned from
this (Job 38:7; Luke 15:10; 1 Cor. 4:9; 11:10; Eph. 3:10; Tim. 3:16; 1
Pet. 1:12).

The Objects of Their Watchfulness
---------------------------------

As indicated previously, they observed God’s creation and rejoiced (Ps.
38:7). At seeing the birth of Christ, the angels rejoiced in praise to
God (Luke 2:13-14) and they witnessed the entirety of Jesus’ life on
earth (1 Tim. 3:16). They also observe God’s joy when a sinner repents
(Luke 15:10).<sup>**[<sup>57</sup>](#sdfootnote57sym)**</sup> Angels are
keenly interested in man’s salvation in Christ and carefully observe
God’s manifold wisdom in the unfolding of His redemptive plan (1 Pet.
1:12; Eph. 3:10). In the statement, “things into which the angels long
to look,” “things” are those things that belong to our salvation (vs.
10), and “long to look” is the same word used of the actions of John and
Peter and Mary when they stooped down to peer into the empty tomb (Luke
24:12; John 20:5, 11). The verb, parakuptw, “to bend over,” conveys the
idea of bending over to see something more clearly or to look intently
(see also Jam. 1:24).

The Reasons for Their Watchfulness
----------------------------------

### The Two Kingdoms and the Angelic Conflict

A question that naturally arises is why are angels so deeply interested
and observant of what is happening on this earth? First, as holy
creatures they are concerned for the worship and glory of God that is
His due as the holy and infinite Creator. This is clearly evident in
Isaiah 6:3 where, in antiphonal chorus, seraphim sing of God’s holiness,
“Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of hosts, The whole earth is full of His
glory.” John states that in their devotion to God’s worship the living
creatures never stop saying: “Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty,
who was, and is, and is to come” (NIV). Their devotion to God’s glory
becomes exceedingly prominent and specific in Revelation. In Revelation
4:8-11, their continuous praise evokes the praise of the twenty-four
elders which is aimed at God’s worthiness as the Sovereign Creator. Then
in chapter 5:8-14, angels, accompanied by the twenty-four elders
(representatives of the church), direct their praise toward God’s
gracious work of salvation through the Lamb in view of His worthiness to
open the seven seals. He alone is found worthy to open the seven-sealed
book and break its seals (cf. Rev. 5:1 with 5:9f).

Though we are not told the exact contents of the seven-sealed book,
written inside and on the back, it undoubtedly contains the story of
man’s loss of his lordship over the earth (Gen. 1:26) to Satan, the
usurper, and its recovery through the God-man Savior, the Lion who is
also the Lamb. This Lamb is alone able to accomplish what no one else in
the universe is qualified and able to do. The following three truths
form an important element of God’s revelation:

(1)***God’s Purpose Declared:*** It was God’s intention that man would
rule over this earth under God’s authority (Gen. 1:26; Ps. 8:4-6; Heb.
2:5-8a).

(2)***God’s Purpose Delayed:*** Because of the fall, as recorded in
Genesis 3, Satan wrested the rule away from man (cf. Heb. 2:5 with
2:8b). God’s intention was for man to rule over this earth, never
angels, much less the fallen angels.

(3)***God’s Purpose Fulfilled:*** But as promised in Genesis 3:15, the
Lamb breaks Satan’s hold by means of His incarnation, sinless life,
death, resurrection, ascension (see Heb. 2:9-14) and will one day
recover that which was lost through the judgments of the seven seals as
described in Revelation 6-19.

One of the key features of Revelation concerns the two kingdoms: the
kingdom of the world (Satan’s kingdom) and the kingdom of God. The words
“king, kings, kingdom,” etc., occur thirty times in twenty-five verses
in this book. In view of the struggle between the two kingdoms, there is
a joyous celebration of voices raised in heaven at the sounding of the
seventh trumpet in anticipation of what the seventh trumpet would
accomplish.<sup>**[<sup>58</sup>](#sdfootnote58sym)**</sup> This surely
includes the holy angels:

Revelation 11:15 And the seventh angel sounded; and there arose loud
voices in heaven, saying, “The kingdom of the world has become *the
kingdom*of our Lord, and of His Christ; and He will reign forever and
ever.”

The issue of Satan’s rebellion to God’s authority may well explain
Paul’s statement in 1 Corinthians 11:10 that a woman is to have a symbol
of authority on her head because of the angels. This suggests that one
of the areas angels observe is that of submission to authority.
Submission glorifies God while rebellion dishonors God and promotes
Satan’s goals. At the root of the angels’ keen interest in what God is
doing today is the rebellion and fall of Satan. As observers, all the
angels were present when Satan, in his quest to be like the Most High,
sought to usurp God’s sovereign rule (see Isa. 14:12-15). This was an
offense to the glory of God. It appears from Revelation 12:3-4 that
one-third of the angelic hosts chose to follow Satan. Because of Satan’s
sin, he was thrust out of his exalted place and became the great
adversary of God and God’s people (see Ezek.
28:11-19).<sup>**[<sup>59</sup>](#sdfootnote59sym)**</sup> In addition,
the Lord also explicitly tells us that the lake of fire was prepared for
Satan and his angels (Matt. 25:41). Though a defeated foe (cf. Col.
2:15), Satan is not confined there now, but he and his fallen angels
will be and this is a great point of anticipation in the Bible (cf. Rom.
16:20; Rev. 20:10).

### Satan’s Characterization as the Slanderer

An understanding of one of Satan’s names is helpful here and is loaded
with implications. The term, *devil*, as used so often of Satan, means,
“slanderer, defamer, one who accuses
falsely.”<sup>**[<sup>60</sup>](#sdfootnote60sym)**</sup> This name
reveals him in one of his key characterizations in Scripture. As “the
slanderer,” he is one who defames the character of God and one of the
ways he seeks to do this is by accusing believers (Rev. 12:10). The book
of Job gives us a good illustration of his defaming accusations against
believers and how, at the same time, he seeks to malign the character of
God. When you read the first two chapters of Job, the true purpose of
Satan’s accusations become quickly evident. Satan’s claim was that Job
only worshipped God because of all God had given to him; it was not
because Job loved God for who He was or because God deserved to be
worshipped as the Holy and Sovereign Creator. Just take away all that he
has and he will curse you, was the essence of Satan’s accusation (cf.
Job 1:6-11; 2:1-6).

### Satan’s Characterization of God

From the Bible’s characterization of Satan as “adversary” (1 Pet.
5:8)<sup>**[<sup>61</sup>](#sdfootnote61sym)**</sup> and “the
devil,”<sup>**[<sup>62</sup>](#sdfootnote62sym)**</sup> and from his
activities as seen in Scripture, it seems only logical that Satan may
have argued that God was unloving and that His judgment of Satan and his
angels to the lake of fire was unfair and unjust. Shortly after the
creation of Adam and Eve, the devil’s attack on the character of God as
unfair becomes immediately evident in the slanderous nature of his
questions and statements to Eve in the temptation (Gen. 3:1-5). So
today, from a world that lies under his deception (see John 12:31;
16:11; Eph. 2:2; 2 Cor. 4:3-4), there is a common sentiment echoed among
many who, rejecting God’s Word, may say, “The God of the Bible is
vengeful. How could a loving God send people to hell? I refuse to
believe in a God like that.”

### A Reason for Man

Part of the reason for man’s creation and for God’s plan of salvation in
Christ is to demonstrate the truth of God’s character as wise, holy,
just, loving, gracious, merciful, and good. In His holiness and justice,
God had no other choice but to judge Satan and his angels to the lake of
fire. The same is true with sinful man. But God is also merciful,
gracious, and loving, so He provided a solution through the cross so
that man could have eternal life. This gracious plan of love was not
only anticipated in the Old Testament, but was actually first announced
to the serpent (the devil in disguise) in Genesis 3:16, which is
significant in view of the angelic conflict and the slanderous
accusations of Satan. Man’s redemption and the recovery of paradise lost
has always been based on what God would do through the seed of the
woman, the Messiah Savior who would die as man’s substitute, but also
defeat Satan and, by implication, demonstrate Satan’s slander as false
(cf. Isa. 53; Rom. 3:21-26; Col. 2:10-15; Heb. 2:14-16).

The Scriptures disclose the truth that the angels learn much about God
from His activities through the person and work of Christ and through
the church, especially in the unfolding of God’s plan of redemption.
Concerning the sufferings of Christ, the glories that will follow, and
the things announced to believers through those who preached the gospel
by the Holy Spirit, Peter declared, “things into which angels long to
look” (see 1 Pet. 1:11-12). Then, along a similar line Paul wrote,

Ephesians 3:8-11 To me, the very least of all saints, this grace was
given, to preach to the Gentiles the unfathomable riches of Christ, 9
and to bring to light what is the administration of the mystery which
for ages has been hidden in God, who created all things; 10 in order
that the manifold wisdom of God might now be made known through the
church to the rulers and the authorities in the heavenly places. 11 This
was in accordance with the eternal purpose which He carried out in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Consequently, the church becomes a means of unveiling both the manifold
wisdom and grace of God to angels, for in Ephesians 2:4-7 Paul wrote:

But God, being rich in mercy, because of His great love with which He
loved us, 5 even when we were dead in our transgressions, made us alive
together with Christ (by grace you have been saved), 6 and raised us up
with Him, and seated us with Him in the heavenly places, in Christ
Jesus, 7 in order that in the ages to come He might show the surpassing
riches of His grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.

Chafer quotes Otto Von Gerlach who pointed out:

By the revelation of Himself in Christ, by the institution of the
Christian Church on earth, God after a manner hitherto unknown glorifies
Himself before the heavenly principalities. They who until now had,
filled with awe, been praising Him for the wonder of creation, now see
His wisdom glorified in a new form in the Christian communion through
the manifold ways by which lost men are saved. Entirely new and
inexhaustible wealth of divine wisdom was manifested in
redemption.<sup>**[<sup>63</sup>](#sdfootnote63sym)**</sup>

### Victory Anticipated

Revelation 4-5 sets forth heaven’s perspective in preparation for the
judgments that will follow on earth as described in chapters 6-19. It is
these judgments that defeat Satan and his world system and establish
God’s Son on His throne on earth. In these two chapters, however, there
is a strong emphasis on the holiness of God, His worthiness to receive
glory and honor, and on the worthiness of the Lamb, the Lord Jesus, to
open and pour out the seals and to reign and receive glory and honor.
And who are also prominent in these two chapters? The angels!

In view of this scenario, we can see why God’s holy angels are so keenly
interested in our salvation because in it they observe the manifold
wisdom, love, grace, and holiness of God (Eph. 3:10; 1 Pet. 1:12). This
becomes even more of an issue when one considers the rebellion and
accusations of Satan in light of the condescension of Christ whose
entire life they witnessed (1 Tim. 3:16). To witness the submission and
condescension of God incarnate, even to the death of the cross, was an
awesome declaration of God’s character as holy and immutable.

What amazing condescension! *Obeying his own law as if he were a mere
creature, and in the attitude of a servant!* This was new. They had seen
him as the governor of the universe; but never till now as a subject!
*Encountering Satan in conflict and prolonged temptation!* This was
new.<sup>**[<sup>64</sup>](#sdfootnote64sym)**</sup>

Think of this! They had seen Satan cast down from his exalted position
and sentenced to the lake of fire because of his pride and rebellion,
but in Christ’s incarnation and submissive life, even to the cross, they
have the ultimate example of God’s holiness, love, grace, and mercy and
the justness of Satan’s sentence.

But what about the fallen angels? Evidently, there was a time of grace
and testing for the angels before Satan’s fall, but they now remain
confirmed in their fallen state just as those who die without Christ
will remain in their fallen state to face the Great White Throne
Judgment and eternal separation from God.

The Angelic Conflict   
and the Moral Problem of Evil
=============================

Understanding the above scenario provides us with part of the answer to
the age old question of how a God who is good could permit evil,
especially if He is omniscient and omnipotent. Contrary to Scripture,
which declares the omnipotence and omniscience of God, some have sought
to answer the problem by claiming that though God is good, He was
helpless to stop evil from happening. Though it is only by implication,
the Bible alone gives us an answer to the problem of evil, which lies,
in part at least, in the angelic conflict briefly described in the
preceding paragraphs. Certain things are basic to a discussion of this
issue.

Scripture reveals God to be perfect in holiness, love, benevolence,
grace, and mercy. This means God cannot do evil because evil is contrary
to His Holy character. For instance, God cannot lie (Tit. 1:2). Further,
He cannot tempt the creature to sin (Jam. 1:13). He cannot be the author
of sin because He has judged all evil and to author sin would be
contrary to His perfect justice and righteousness. God could not judge
sin in the creature if He was the author of the creature’s sin.
Therefore, though allowed by God, evil did not originate from God. It
originated from something outside of God.

According to the Bible, the original human sin as recorded in Genesis 3
is not the first sin in the universe. The Bible reveals the moral
problem is related to: (1) the fall of Satan and his angels into sin;
(2) Satan’s characterization as the slandering adversary of God; (3)
God’s purpose for man to rule on the earth with the loss of that rule
through man’s temptation and fall into sin; and (4) man’s redemption and
the recovery of that rule through the sinless God-man Savior who bore
the penalty for our sin.

In the study of this moral problem certain facts emerge. It is clear
that God in creating angels and men created them as moral creatures with
the power of choice. The sin problem is present when a moral creature
chooses sin instead of righteousness. This is the explanation for the
fall of angels and the fall of
men.<sup>**[<sup>65</sup>](#sdfootnote65sym)**</sup>

Scripture’s revelation of Satan’s fall, man’s fall, and the ensuing
angelic conflict envelops us in things far beyond our comprehension.
Nevertheless, the Bible teaches that God created the angels and man. As
suggested by the fellowship that can be observed in the Trinity between
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, God’s very being necessitated that He
bring forth creatures for fellowship, but He did not create these
creatures as robots who have no choice. There would be no fellowship or
glory with a mechanical robot that had no choice. God gave both angels
and human beings personalities with intellect, emotion, and volition. By
the exercise of this personality, both mankind and angels could have
fellowship with God and bring glory to Him. But, though created perfect
and without sin, freedom of choice also meant the possibility, known
from eternity by God, that Satan and mankind could choose against God,
which both did. So why did God allow it? Perhaps the answer lies in the
aftermath of sin since God’s glory is displayed even more. Just as
nothing displays the splendor of a diamond in the light more than a
backdrop of black velvet, so nothing could display the glory of God’s
mercy, goodness, grace, and love as much as the blackness of man’s sin.

Because this perplexes the human mind, many reject the whole idea of God
or postulate weakness to God or in some way find fault with God. But the
Bible has some important words of warning regarding such a response and
the story of Job, his trials, the activity of Satan and the good angels
as mentioned in Job are instructive here. The book of Job is significant
to questions regarding the moral problem of evil and the presence of
suffering because of the insight it gives us into the adversarial
activity of Satan and the activities of angels called “sons of God” (see
Job 1:6-13; 2:1-7; 38:4-6).

Angels are mentioned as present and giving praise to God when God
created the earth (Job 38:7), but in Job 1:6 and 2:1, the “sons of God”
appear before God, undoubtedly as His attendants and submissive servants
in adoration and praise of the Almighty. But then Satan is suddenly
introduced into the picture as the slandering accuser. Though the
specific reason for Satan’s appearance is not stated, the questions God
asks of Satan makes the reason clear. He is there to carry on his
slanderous activity in his ongoing conflict against the character of
God.

Briefly, then, what the Bible teaches us about Satan and sin and
suffering provides us with an answer to this moral dilemma. The book of
Job with its revelation about Satan, the angels, Job’s trials and his
responses to his suffering add important insight to our understanding
and response to the moral problem of evil.

Job was a man who suffered tremendously. His losses and pain were awful.
So along came three friends who sought to counsel him, but with friends
like these, who needs enemies? In essence, their counsel was that his
suffering was caused by sin. And, of course, sometimes that is the cause
of suffering, but personal sin is only one of the reasons Scripture
gives for suffering. In the process of Job’s dialogue with his three
friends, Job sought to vindicate himself against their accusations. He
sought to show he was innocent of any wrong that had caused his pain.
And in essence, he was. But as this dialogue and Job’s suffering
continued over a prolonged period, Job began to become angry with God
and he developed a demanding spirit. This seems evident by God’s words
to Job seen in chapters 38-40, but especially in the following verses:

Job 38:2-4 Who is this that darkens counsel By words without knowledge?
3 Now gird up your loins like a man, And I will ask you, and you
instruct Me! 4 Where were you when I laid the foundation of the earth?
Tell Me, if you have understanding,

In other words, how absurd to think that a creature should become the
critic of the Creator or of what He is doing as the Sovereign Lord of
the universe. The next two chapters, then, develop this theme of God’s
wisdom and power.

Job 40:1-2 Then the LORD said to Job, “Will the faultfinder contend with
the Almighty? Let him who reproves God answer it.”

Job then answered and said,

Job 40:4-5 Behold, I am insignificant; what can I reply to You? I lay my
hand on my mouth. 5 Once I have spoken, and I will not answer; Even
twice, and I will add no more.

Though this was a start in the right direction, it is clear from what
followed that Job was humbled but not yet repentant so God questioned
him further. Why? May I suggest that when Job criticized God’s ways or
became demanding toward God he was in effect following in the footsteps
of Satan in both finding fault and usurping God’s position as governor
of the world. In the next paragraph (vss. 6-14), one full of irony, God
asks if Job can really perform those things that only God is able to do.
Note verses 7-9:

Job 40:7-9. Then the LORD answered Job out of the storm, and said, 7
“Now gird up your loins like a man; I will ask you, and you instruct Me.
8 Will you really annul My judgment? Will you condemn Me that you may be
justified? 9 Or do you have an arm like God, And can you thunder with a
voice like His?”

Though the problem of evil and Satan baffles the human mind, only God’s
Word gives us a reasonable explanation as to the cause, course, and
ultimate destiny of evil. Our need is to recognize that God is not only
sovereign and infinitely wise, but submit in faith to the plan of God.
The book of Revelation, a book filled with references to angels, gives
us the end result—the final defeat of sin, death, and Satan with his
fallen angels, and with paradise regained. Then God will wipe away every
tear and the universe will know permanent joy and peace beyond our
wildest dreams.

The very nature of the complexity of creation not only demands an
adequate cause, a Creator, but it demonstrates His infinite wisdom and
power (Ps. 19:1-6; Rom. 1:18-21). God is infinitely wise. He is the
omniscient One in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. And though God has revealed some things to us, He has
obviously left much that is not revealed. We would simply not have the
ability to grasp it in our present state (cf. Deut. 29:29). Regardless,
it is vital for faith and practice that we come to the point where we
not only recognize our thoughts and ways are far different from His, but
that in faith we accept what He has revealed. Note the focus in the
passage below.

Isaiah 55:6-9 Seek the Lord while He may be found; Call upon Him while
He is near. 7 Let the wicked forsake his way, And the unrighteous man
his thoughts; And let him return to the Lord, And He will have
compassion on him; And to our God, For He will abundantly pardon. 8 “For
My thoughts are not your thoughts, Neither are your ways My ways,”
declares the Lord. 9 “For *as*the heavens are higher than the earth, So
are My ways higher than your ways, And My thoughts than your thoughts.”

Does this mean we should not ask questions and look for answers to the
mysteries of the universe? Of course not. But where God has given us
revelation or where we find God’s answers in the Bible, whether by
explicit statement or by strong implicit arguments, our need is to
humbly submit to what it teaches and put the things that still perplex
us on the top shelf for later understanding. This, of course, is the
crucial issue. What does the Bible really teach on any of these
questions? Our tendency is to look at the Bible’s answers through human
reason and logic. Then, when it seems contrary to human reason, our
tendency is to reject it or at least question it or twist the truth to
suit our human logic. For instance, the doctrine of the trinity is *not*
*explicitly* taught in the Bible, but it is *clearly taught implicitly*
in Scripture. Other doctrines, like the incarnation, are beyond our
ability to grasp but it is a doctrine *explicitly* stated in the Bible.
So Isaiah wrote, “But to this one I will look, To him who is humble and
contrite of spirit, and who trembles at My word” (Isa. 66:3b).

Lessons From the Angels
=======================

A study of the angels, both good and bad, furnishes us with a number of
lessons as to how we should and should not live both negatively and
positively. The apostle Paul provides a precedent for this in his
warning regarding selecting novices for elders in 1 Timothy 3:6-7.

Negative Lessons
----------------

Satan, as the anointed cherub, was not only created perfect, but he was
exceedingly beautiful. His high position and beauty, of course, were the
products of God’s grace and creative powers, not Satan’s. Nevertheless,
he became puffed up with pride over his own beauty and power. He forgot
his creatureliness and wanted to become like God (cf. Ezek. 28:11-15;
Isa. 14:12-13). For his pride and rebellion, he was judged and cast from
his exalted position as the anointed cherub and sentenced to the lake of
fire, the place of his eventual doom. As such, Satan not only becomes
the classic illustration of the temptation and foolishness of pride in
the creature, but pride becomes one of his chief snares by which he
seeks to cause trouble among the people of God who are so prone to
become puffed up over their own abilities or roles or over the abilities
and roles of others, all of which are gifts of God. In view of this ever
present danger, Paul warned against selecting a new convert to a
position of authority, “lest he become conceited and fall into the
condemnation incurred by the devil. And he must have a good reputation
with those outside *the church,*so that he may not fall into reproach
and the snare of the devil” (1 Tim. 3:6-7).

Satan and his fallen angels also warn us against the evil nature and the
dangers of rebellion in contrast with submission and obedience. Perhaps
there is no place where this is more clearly stated than in 1 Samuel
15:22-23. Here the seriousness of disobedience (vs. 22), which is
essentially defined as rebellion (vs. 23), is underscored by the
comparisons made to divination and idolatry. Samuel compares it to
divination (Hebrew, *qesem*, a general term for various occult practices
or spiritism. For some of the various forms of divination see
Deuteronomy 18:10-11.). Divination like idolatry is demonic (see 1 Cor.
10:19-22). Behind the occult and idolatry is the work of Satan, the
rebel of rebels.

Ultimately, Satan and his evil angels, the demons, furnish examples of
all that is evil along with the hideous consequences of evil. Satan is a
rebel, a liar, a murderer, a deceiver, a slanderer, a tempter, a
distorter, and one who opposes all that is good, righteous, and holy. As
a murderer from the beginning and the father of lies (John 8:44) who
tempted Eve in Eden, he ultimately becomes the father of all that is
evil.

This, of course, does not abdicate man from his responsibility to choose
what is good nor can we blame Satan for our own sin, though he is always
on the prowl to promote sin and to deceive and tempt us. Though Satan
tempts us constantly, our temptation to sin ultimately stems from our
own lusts that wage war in our souls (Jam. 1:14; 1 Pet. 2:11; Eph. 2:3).

Positive Lessons
----------------

The many references to God’s holy angels in the Bible are chiefly
records of their many activities, but two things quickly standout. They
are constantly seen in the activities of worshipful adoration of God and
in humble service, totally submissive to the will of God. If these
celestial beings, with all their strength, holiness, and knowledge of
God are so committed, should they not be a motivation and an example to
us?

It was after Isaiah saw the holy seraphim in worship and humility
(suggested by the covering of their feet) exalting the Lord, that he
then saw and confessed his own sinfulness and became a willing servant.
It was then, in answer to the Lord’s question, “Whom shall I send?” that
the prophet said, “Here am I, send me” (see Isa. 6:1-8). Following the
joyous news of Messiah’s birth, the experience of seeing Jesus in
Bethlehem, and hearing the heavenly hosts of angels praising God, it was
the shepherds who, following the example of the angels, went back
“glorifying and praising God for all that they had heard and seen, just
as had been told them” (Luke 2:20).

A consciousness of the reality of the vast hosts of angelic being—the
benefit derived from the good, and the opposition of the bad—can be
gained only through meditation upon the Scriptures that record these
truths, and through
prayer.<sup>**[<sup>66</sup>](#sdfootnote66sym)**</sup>

