---
title: Balaam
display_title: Balaam
layout: lesson
description: Short description of Balaam's career with reference to the Doctrine of Balaam [JAN 2012]
---


**Balaam**

Balaam was a Gentile living in the city of Pethor in Mesopotamia. He was a poet and a prophet of sorts, but he belongs to the Midianites. See Numbers 22 and following for his story.

Balaam possessed some knowledge of Jehovah, the true God; and he
acknowledged that his superior powers and knowledge as a prophet came
from God. Balaam had become somewhat famous and he became conceited and
covetous.

**The Israelites Encounter with the Midianites**

The Israelites had camped in the plain of Moab on their second approach
to the land of Canaan. Balak, the king of Moab, entered into a league
with the Midianites against the Israelites. He sent messengers to Balaam
with money to pay him to place a curse on the Israelites.

TOPIC: Moabites

Balaam did not trust the messengers and asked them to spend the night so
that he could consult with God. God expressly prohibited Balaam from
going back with the men to Moab, so they returned to Balak.

Balak sent some very high officials on another mission to Balaam; and
Balaam was promised great reward and much honor. Balaam replied that he
could not be tempted by reward but that he would speak what the Lord
would reveal. The ambassadors spent the night and Balaam again talked to
the Lord. Because of Balaam’s persistence, he secured permission from
God to accompany Balak’s messengers, with the understanding that God
would dictate what Balaam would speak.

In the morning Balaam proceeded with the princes of Moab, but God’s
anger was kindled against him. An angel barred his way on the road to
Moab. Balaam did not see the angel, but the donkey Balaam was riding saw
him and shied away into a field. Then, when Balaam tried to keep the
donkey on the trail, the donkey squeezed Balaam’s foot against a wall.
Finally, the donkey fell down. Balaam became enraged and beat the donkey
with a stick. The donkey then questioned Balaam about the beating. Then
Balaam was able to see the angel. The angel accused Balaam of
perverseness, but told him to go on to Moab but only to speak the things
God would tell him.

When Balaam met Balak, he told him that he would only speak what the
Lord told him to. According to Balaam’s direction, he and Balak erected
seven altars upon each of which they offered a ram and a bullock.

Three times Balaam tried to speak a curse against Israel, but his very
speaking was overruled by God. Instead of cursings coming out of his
mouth there were blessings and magnificent prophecies, reaching forward
in time until they told of, “a Star rising out of Jacob.”

Balak was very disappointed, to say the least. So to assuage Balak’s
feelings, Balaam advised him that since he could not curse Israel, the
Moabites could do just as much damage to Israel by seducing the
Israelites to commit fornication with them. A great deal of damage was
done over several generations by this practice.

A battle was fought between the Israelites and Midianites, and Balaam
sided with the Midianites and was slain. See Num. 31:8.

Balaam comes down in history as the prototype of the typical hireling prophet eager only to commercialize his gift. 2 Pet. 2:15; Titus 1

The doctrine of Balaam mentioned in Rev. 2:14 was the teaching of the mercenary prophet to abandon godly separation and character in favor of worldly corruption and conformity. Balaam taught Balak to corrupt the people that he could not conquer. He was ignorant of God’s principles, and too self centered to use his gift properly.

