---
title: Chastisement
layout: lesson
---


**Chastisement** **4**

**Chastisement (Divine Discipline)**

Introduction

Whom the Lord loves, He chastens, whether it is an individual, a city or
community, or a nation. Because God loves the whole world, there has
always been a lot of chastening going on. The history of the Jews as a
nation is, in part, a story of the cycles of discipline and recovery
they experienced throughout all their generations. Many parallel lessons
can be learned by individual believers regarding the way the Lord
handles the individual and nation in grace when either is disobedient.

Chastisement or Divine Discipline of the Christian Believer

Chastisement of individuals is for Christian believers only (Heb. 12:5).
God’s discipline is based on love, and when a believer is out of
fellowship, discipline is aimed at only one thing, to get the believer
to acknowledge his sin to God, to confess in order to be restored to
fellowship (Heb. 12:6).

Discipline never means a loss of salvation (Gal. 3:26). Divine
discipline is chastisement for sins of the believer in the immediate
context of the sin that was committed. Discipline is removed by Biblical
confession of sin (1 John 1:9; 1 Cor. 11:31).

Suffering may well be part of the chastisement and confession does not
remove the suffering. However, when suffering continues after the
believer has been restored to fellowship, the cursing is turned to
blessing; that is, the suffering is for a positive purpose.

If a believer continues in sin and refuses to repent and confess, the
chastisement will become more and more severe. Certain sins bring
compounded discipline, particularly those in which the believer is
acting as a stumbling block to others (Matt. 7:1–12). In extreme cases,
the believer could suffer the sin unto death. However, all chastisement
is confined to time; there will be no discipline for believers in
eternity (Rev. 21:4)

The believer can avoid divine discipline through a consistent exercise
of the principles of Christian living outlined in the word of God, as
illustrated by the passage in Heb. 12:1‑6.

Confession is equivalent to laying aside the weight of Heb. 12:1. The
result is production and the fruit of the Holy Spirit. The phrase let us
run with patience refers to the faith rest life. This is faith patience,
also spoken of in James 1.

The next recovery principle is occupation with Christ also called
looking unto Jesus. described in Heb. 12:2. Then, avoid sins of the
mind; avoid becoming wearied, a reference to mental depression resulting
from sin in Heb. 12:3. If any of the following are harbored continually,
mental illness can result: A guilt complex; bitterness or hatred toward
others; jealousy or envy; fear about the present or future; anxiety or
worry about little things; desire for revenge; arrogance; judging
another or running him down to others.

Heb. 12:4 refers to having victory over the sin nature. Confess, keep
moving, separate from the sin, grow up in Christ, stand on grace
principles, exercise faith rest and rely on positional truth.

Live in the word, Heb. 12:5.

Divine discipline is designed to restrain us from sin and to teach us
lessons which will result in growth (Heb. 12:11).

Divine Discipline for a Nation

The Bible has many examples of divine discipline being brought against
communities or nations. The most dramatic discipline of a city occurred
at Sodom and Gomorrah when God destroyed the cities and their
inhabitants at one stroke. There had not been even a remnant of faithful
people there in order to preserve the cities from final judgment. Even
Lot and his family protested against having to leave.

Another example is the destruction of heathen Jericho in which all
inhabitants were killed except for Rahab and her family. Rahab obviously
had positive volition toward the gospel, and her family enjoyed blessing
by association in their narrow escape.

As the individual goes, so goes the nation. In order for a nation to
avoid divine discipline, there must be at least some of its citizens who
live in fellowship with the Lord. A question arises as to how many
positive believers constitute a remnant, a quorum. The answer is that at
least some of the citizenry and some of the political leadership of a
nation must be faithful believers and have enough influence to maintain
the divine institutions in that nation. It is possible that the remnant
could be very small if it is composed of the most influential and
powerful citizens, such as kings, presidents, or other top political and
business leaders. In a democracy, the remnant would probably have to be
fairly large in order to have divine viewpoint influence in elections.

The key is this: in order for a nation to survive there must be freedom
and morality. These are vital for the preservation of national integrity
and for the maintaining of the divine institutions of volition,
marriage, family and nationalism.

There must be freedom so that the word of God can be taught clearly and
every citizen be given a chance to decide on issues of salvation and
Christian living. People need freedom so that, under positive volition
to the word of God, they can keep their marriages and their families
together. Families and nations are a part of God’s plan for the human
race. Satan’s program is immorality, family breakup and
internationalism. The divine Institutions were given to preserve the
human race after the fall and to protect the nations from the inroads of
Satan’s program.

There must be morality in order to protect people from criminality,
disease and the other consequences of unchecked sinfulness. In
particular, the institutions of marriage and the family are very much
dependent on a high level of morality in the community so that parents
can maintain positive momentum for long periods of time while they are
training and nurturing their children. It is the breakdown of morality
which is the first and most obvious indication that both the individual
and the nation are in trouble.

The Five Stages of National Chastisement - Leviticus 26

The cycle of chastisement for a nation refers to the five stages, or
increments, of chastisement which God brings on a nation which
steadfastly refuses to repent of its immorality and live according to
God’s plan. When a nation at first very subtly begins to drift away from
the Lord, indicated by a laxness in morality in many of its citizens and
an indifference to the word of God, the Lord begins the discipline with
relatively gentle reminders in the form of a loss of peace, a reduction
in prosperity and so forth. At the other end of the scale, God allows
the complete destruction of a nation which has defiantly ignored all
levels of discipline. This destruction is analogous to the sin unto
death suffered by an individual who is intractable in his defiance of
God (Nadab and Abihu, Saul, Ananias and Sapphira).

At this point you should read Leviticus 26:14–29. That chapter provides
a concise outline of God’s warnings about the levels of punishment He
will bring on the nation of Israel if they will not turn from their
sinful rebellion.

**First Stage** - Discipline of the nation begins with relatively mild
problems, including people’s loss of inner peace and mental depression.
There will be great fear and paranoia among the people, accompanied by
lack of success in business and agriculture, poverty, sickness, and
defeat in battle.

**Second Stage -**Verses 18 to 20 show the discipline which is
characterized by a continued lack of fellowship with the Lord, loss of
national prestige and honor, a cessation of God’s grace provision for
the nation and a great barrenness in the land.

**Third Stage** - verses 21 and 22 include great plagues, no control
over natural enemies, a general inability to subdue the earth, the death
of children and the beginnings of great desolation among the people.

**Fourth Stage** - In verses 23-26 chastisement becomes severe, with
increased attacks by enemies, invasions by foreign powers. There is
extreme economic adversity and poor productivity, even in the production
of necessities, resulting in famine. Some national sovereignty remains,
but invaders have ever-widening influence in all areas of life. There
are increases in plagues and disease.

**Fifth Stage** -The fifth stage of discipline involves complete loss of
personal and national sovereignty, the destruction of the family and the
nation. Offerings to God are unacceptable. Nations which have undergone
this destruction have experienced slavery, cannibalism, and the
assimilation of its surviving citizens into other cultures.

Seeds of National Destruction, Genesis 11

The people of Babel, in defiance of God, thought they could construct a
better society, a more secure, more compatible, more idealistic
community. Their volitional defiance of God began at the grass roots
level; then they united in an effort to organize their society under
agreed upon principles. They had a complete disregard for God; there was
no communication between God and man. They refused divine viewpoint and
the commandment to go throughout the world and multiply.

During the age of the Jews there were many examples of national
discipline. Hosea 4:1-7 gives an example of the nation rejecting Bible
teaching and building for chastisement. They were engaged in false
business practices (4:2); there was no application of faithfulness or
kindness(4:1); they were in a miserable state of life (4:3); there was
false prosperity(4:7); they followed their religious leaders to
destruction.

The whole book of Isaiah, notably chapter 28, was directed at the nation
which had rejected the authority of God.

National destruction came on every nation that rejected the word of God,
not just the nation of Israel. Canaan was destroyed by the Jews under
Joshua. There was divine discipline on Egypt for refusing to let the
Jews leave. Assyria was destroyed (2 Kings 19:35; 2 Chron. 32:21).
Babylon, in turn, faded quickly as a nation (Daniel 5).

Discipline is related to cities as well as to nations, as the following
examples indicate:

Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 18:20

Jericho, Joshua 6

Jerusalem, Luke 21:24; Jeremiah. 5:1

Damascus, Isaiah 17:1

Nineveh, Nahum 3:5-8

Babylon, Isaiah 13:19-21

Tyre, Ezekiel 26,27; Isaiah 23:1

The two verses do not clearly state Rome is destroyed.

Chorazin and Bethsaida, Matthew 11:21

Sidon, Ezekiel 28:20-22

