---
title: Children Goals
layout: lesson
---


**Children, Goals 3**

Goals in Training Children

This paper gives some general ideas about the goals parents can set in
child training. You will probably have your child in the home for about
18 years, and during that time it is your responsibility to see that the
child is educated, trained, and brought to enough spiritual maturity to
make the transition into Christian adulthood.

You can set up a life “curriculum” for your child, for every year of his
life, which will enable him to reach his potential in God’s plan for his
life. The principles laid out in this paper will give you a “syllabus”
for organizing your child’s Christian education (edification).

The following are the main principles found in the Bible dealing with
parental responsibilities:

• Children are a gift from God to parents. There are both privileges and
responsibilities resulting from this gift. Gen. 48:9; Psa. 127:3;
Isa. 8:18

• The chief responsibility of parents is the teaching and training of
their children. Deut. 6:6,7; Prov. 22:6; 2 Cor. 12:14; Eph. 6:4;
Col. 3:21; 1 Tim. 3:4,12; Tit. 2:4; Deut. 4:9; 31:13

• Parents’ duties include providing for children’s physical needs.
2 Cor. 12:14

• Parents are expected to administer correction involving discipline.
Eph. 6:4; 1 Tim. 3:4; Deut. 4:9; Prov. 19:18; 22:15; 23:13

In all eras of Bible history, parents brought their children to public
Bible teaching. Josh. 8:35; 2 Chron. 20:13; Neh. 12:43; Prov. 8:17,32;
Matt. 21:15; Psa. 34:11; Prov. 3:1

See related passages also in Josh. 1:8; Heb. 3:13; Acts 2:46,47;
5:41,42; 16:4,5; 17:10,11

The Word of God is administered to children in large doses. 2 Tim. 3:15;
1 Sam. 2:26; Luke 1:80; 2:49

Parents must realize that children who, in later life, dishonor their
parents, bear heavy consequences as the result of divine discipline.
Deut. 21:20; 27:16; Prov. 15:20; 30:11; Micah 7:6; 2 Tim. 3:2; Matt.
15:4; Isa. 45:10.

A Set of Biblical Goals

The following goals are derived from Scripture context, and they relate
to the spiritual development of a Christian of any age. You would like
to see your child advance as far as possible toward these goals during
his childhood and adolescence. Each of the goals stated arises from a
specific Bible promise relating to God’s plan for the Christian Way of
Life and productivity during the believer’s lifetime.

• Christian parents wants salvation for their children. Many Christian
parents lead their own children to Christ.

• Another goal for children is that they have the ability to live in
fellowship with God, through Biblical confession of sin, to support
daily growth in the spiritual life.

• You want your child to have inner happiness, the peace of God that
passes understanding, and great inner joy that doesn’t depend on the
details of life. Isa. 26:3; Psa. 128:1,2; Prov. 3:18; John 13:17, etc.

• You want your child to be mentally stable and psychologically normal.
A child can be fully adjusted to circumstances whether they are pleasant
or adverse. This requires learning to have a relaxed mental attitude
which results from claiming the promises of Scripture, executing the
commands, and learning doctrine.

• Another goal is that your child have respect for authority, of all
kinds: parental, political, spiritual. As a child observes his mother’s
submission to his father, or his father’s submission to legal
author­ity, he will have a very positive object lesson in proper
response to authority. Eph. 5:22; Col. 3:18

• Your child can have a mastery of the details of life, such things as
money, job, health, status, friends, social life, possessions,
enter­tainments, etc.

Mastery of the details of life means:

(1) having the ability to enjoy the details of life without being a
slave to them, and

(2) having perfect inner happiness in the absence of one or more details
of life.

While there are differences in how much parents can provide in actual
details of life for their children, any parent can train a child so that
he does not seek his satisfaction in those things or make them objects
of a search for happiness.

• An important goal is teaching a child about the production of divine
good, the lifelong production of “gold, silver, and precious stones”
rather than “wood, hay and stubble”. A life of witnessing is included in
this, as well as the exercise of spiritual gifts, regardless of
vocation.

• A child must learn as early in possible the means of having victory
over sin, from the standpoint of staying in fellowship with God and in
developing freedom from chronic, fear, worry, cruelty, bitterness, envy,
hatred, maligning, gossiping, judging, revenge seeking, and so forth.
Along with this is the freedom from the need to sublimate through
alcohol, drugs, or fornication.

The result of victory over sin patterns in the life is the freedom from
divine discipline and from the self-induced misery caused by sin with
and the accompanying neuroses and psychoses brought on by chronic sin.

• In all phases of life, your child should develop a set of Bible
stan­dards by which to make decisions which come from divine view­point.

• A child can develop the ability to give and receive love, first of all
to love and be occupied with the Lord Jesus Christ, then to have a
genuine impersonal love for others, and to be able to exhibit true
rapport love for friends, family, and spouse.

Along with this is your desire that your child will have the wisdom to
be able to distinguish God’s choice for marriage partner. This includes
an under-standing of biblical principles of Christian courtship and
marriage, the ability to distinguish true love, and the knowledge of how
to set the pattern for a successful marriage, even during the dating
years and engagement period.

Help in the Project of Training Children

There is no question that parents have the responsibility for training
children, but there is a lot of help available, especially in the local
church. The church provides opportunity for parents and children to be
trained in the Word of God with doctrines essential to family life and
Christian living. Both the pastor’s public teaching and the ministry of
other mature believers in the church, some of whom have “faithful
children, not accused of riot or unruly”, are sources of help to parents
in achieving the goals stated above.

A parent can sometimes delegate academic education responsibility to
school teachers whom he regards as competent, people who will reinforce
with the child the doctrines and standards he learns in the home and at
church. The Christian school, for example, can help parents by providing
competent academic instruction in an environment parents with which the
parents can be comfortable. The Christian school also provides a format
for the sharing of spiritual gifts of teachers along with academic
expertise which parents may not possess. This type of school has
administrators and teachers whose orientation to life and to doctrine is
similar to the parents’ and that provides reinforcement of the divine
viewpoint taught at home.

Where suitable public or private schools are not available, the parent
must consider educating the child at home. Again, there are usually many
resource people in a local church who can help with curriculum,
tutoring, and management of the academics.

Results of Failure to Follow Biblical Practices in Raising Children

When parents fail to stay in God’s plan for the Christian Way of Life,
they will not be in a position to lead their children in obtaining the
goals listed here. Therefore, the rest of this paper is a warning to
parents who are tempted to be “dropouts”.

When parents fail to commit themselves to a consistent routine of Bible
study and Christian growth, accompanied by the consistent control of the
Holy Spirit, a condition will occur described in the Bible as “darkness
in the soul” or “blindness in the soul”, Eph. 4:17,18. When this
happens, the fol­lowing progressive negative results are observed, all
of which have an enor­mous negative impact on children, as you can see.

• Soul darkness leads to a breakdown in the faith system of acquiring
wisdom, a lessening of the understanding of God’s point of view, and a
cessation of spiritual growth.

• In the place of divine standards come human standards, criteria,
programs, false standards. This results in subjectivity, unhappi­ness,
frustration.

• Without a true source for happiness, the believer’s frustration leads
him to a frantic search for happiness through the details of life. He
becomes a slave to those details.

• The believer also begins to produce his own misery. God’s
chas­tisement is compounded daily. Neuroses and psychoses are devel­oped
from chronic mental attitude sins. And all this is aggravated by his
having no defense against the attacks of Satan. The Christian is still
in the battle, but he doesn’t have his armor on. He becomes a casualty
in the spiritual conflict.

• Meanwhile, arrogant self-righteousness replaces the righteousness of
God, Rom. 10:3. This leads to systems of pseudo-spirituality in which
the believer sets up his own system for pleasing God and obtaining His
blessing. At the same time he becomes even more alienated from the Word
of God, which is the only solution to his downward slide.

When parents are alienated from the Lord, the results in the lives of
their children are, of course, catastrophic.

• First, the child adopts the negative viewpoint of his parents toward
the Word of God; so he doesn’t get into his own program of doctri­nal
intake.

• Then, his parents’ human viewpoint becomes his own; he adopts their
standards, their criteria, their doctrine, their methods, etc.

• Further, his parents’ pursuit of happiness through the details of life
influences his value judgments, his career plans, his orientation to God
and God’s Word. So children are sometimes further isolated from Bible
teaching than are their parents because they never achieve the initial
momentum with which their parents may have started.

This is the progression of sin which the Bible says is visited upon the
succeeding generations of children.

• The only ray of encouragement in this description is that a child has
his own volition and may at some point in his life become positive to
Grace on his own. He can certainly recover from his parents’
backsliding, but he will experience the effects of poor child training
all of his life.

There are many principles for parents to learn from the Bible about
avoiding the pitfalls in child training and to help their children make
rapid progress in the Christian way of life. I hope that this paper has
whet your appetite to follow through on the responsibilities God gives
you.

