---
title: Circumcision
layout: lesson
---


**Circumcision 2**

Circumcision

One of the first acts of circumcision in the human race involved
Abraham.

*Genesis 17:6-11 And I will make thee exceedingly fruitful, and I will
make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.*

*And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after
thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto
thee, and to thy seed after thee.*

*And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein
thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting
possession; and I will be their God.*

*And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou,
and thy seed after thee in their generations.*

*This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy
seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised.*

*And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a
token of the covenant betwixt me and you.*

This initial act of circumcision was the seal of Abraham’s faith in
God’s promise of possessing the land. It was the indication that Abraham
believed God’s word. Abraham separated himself unto the Lord and to the
Lord’s promise.

Circumcision is, therefore, a sign of regeneration for the Jews. It was
to the born again Jew what water baptism is to the born-again believer
in the Church Age, a sign.

Circumcision is also used by God as a teaching mechanism, a visual aid
to provide a picture of regeneration by faith. The circumcision of male
children on the 8th day was an act of dedication by the parents. By this
means they declared that they would teach salvation by faith to their
children. They anticipated that their children would become believers.

*Col. 2:11-13 In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made
without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the
circumcision of Christ:*

*Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through
the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead.*

*And you, being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh,
hath he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all
trespasses.*

Circumcision is also a picture of positional truth, especially the
identification with Jesus Christ in His death, burial, and resurrection.

There can be no victory in the Christian way of life without victory
over the old life, over the sin nature. This is the application of
positional truth to experience.

The Lord also used circumcision as a picture of Israel’s restoration to
fellowship and service.

**READ Joshua 5:1-9**

This restoration, by faith, was necessary for the victory the Israelites
were about to experience (Jericho) and for the time of rest they were
about to enter. There can be no victory over Canaan until there is
victory over carnality (Egypt). Circumcision denotes separation from the
world and the flesh, self-judgment, yieldedness, dedication, commitment.

*Romans 4:9-13 Cometh this blessedness then upon the circumcision only,
or upon the uncircumcision also? for we say that faith was reckoned to
Abraham for righteousness.*

*How was it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in
uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.*

*And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness
of the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he might be the
father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised; that
righteousness might be imputed unto them also.*

*And the father of circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision
only, but who also walk in the steps of that faith of our father
Abraham, which he had being yet uncircumcised.*

*For the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, was not to
Abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but through the righteousness
of faith.*

Circumcision is a sign of imputed righteousness; it is the sign that one
has believed and is cleansed by the blood of Christ and has God’s
Righteousness credited to his account. Gen. 15:6; 2 Cor. 5:21.

The true significance of circumcision was not in the physical act being
perpetuated but in the reasons the ritual was begun in the first place.
Circumcision was a sign that something had already taken place, namely,
Abraham’s salvation.

Circumcision was also a seal. A seal indicates the validity of the thing
to which it is attached. It has no significance apart from that which it
covers. Circumcision was a seal attached to something valuable,
salvation.

During the Church Age, water baptism is the outward sign of an inward
faith. Circumcision was the outward sign for the Jews before the Church
Age.

Religious Jews tried to make the seal valuable in itself. They attached
spiritual value to the act of circumcision, ignoring the substance. They
contended that circumcision was needed for salvation, which led to the
formation of a ritualistic religion.

Abraham was saved by faith, long before he was circumcised. He is,
therefore, the “father of all who believe” because he is the pattern of
those who were saved in status quo uncircumcision, whether Jew or
Gentile.

