---
title: Essenes
layout: lesson
---


**Essenes 3**

The Essenes

The Essenes were a Jewish religious community which was first mentioned
in history in the writings of Josephus (Antiquities, XIII, 5, 9), who
mentions them as flourishing in the time of Jonathan Maccabaeus, in
about 150 B.C., where he speaks of Judas, an Essene.

The Essenes are not mentioned directly in the Bible. However, it is
thought that Matt. 19:11,12 and Col. 2:8 and 18 include indirect
references to Essenes. In any case, the Essenes disappeared from history
after the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 A.D.

The Essenes were an extremely ascetic group of men in Palestine and
Syria, and they are thought to have formed the first cells of organized
monasticism in the Mediterranean world, setting the pattern for the
various holy orders which proliferated during and after the time of
Christ. It is still not clear whether the Essenes proceeded from some
sect of Judaism or whether elements of Greek and other foreign
philosophies had an influence in their origin. Their main colonies were
near the northern end of the Dead Sea and around the town of Engedi. The
study of the Dead Sea Scrolls has produced a considerable body of
knowledge of the early Christian sects; and the Essenes may have been
the group which produced the scrolls. The bibliography of this article
provides references for further study.

Essene Organization

The community of the Essenes was organized as a single body, with a
president at the head. The members had to obey the president
unconditionally. A man who wanted to join the order was given three
articles: a pickax, an apron, and a white garment. After a year’s
probation, during which he was observed continuously, he was admitted to
the second stage of his probation period. Another two years passed,
after which the successful candidate was admitted as a full member and
allowed to participate in the common meals. He was required to take a
terrible oath, in which he swore to be absolutely open to the brethren
and to keep secret the doctrines of the order, under pain of
excommunication.

Children were instructed in the principles of Essenism; and Josephus
says that the Essenes were divided into four classes. The children
formed the first class, the first and second stages of novices were the
next classes, and the fourth class were the full members.

Essene Discipline

Discipline was carried out by trial, and guilt was never decided unless
at least one hundred members voted for it. After that, the decision was
unalterable. The usual punishment was excommunication, often amounting
to a slow death, since an Essene could not take food prepared by
strangers, for fear of pollution.

The strongest tie between members was the absolute community of goods.
Those who came into the order had to give all they had to stewards who
were appointed to take care of their common affairs. There was one purse
for all, and all members had expenses, clothing, and food in common.
Those who were needy, such as the aged and infirm, were cared for at the
common expense; and special officers were assigned in each town to take
care of traveling brethren.

Essene Ethics and Customs

The daily labor of the members was strictly regulated. After group
prayer, the members were dismissed to work by their president. They
reassembled later for purifying washings and the common meal. They went
to work again for the afternoon and gathered again for the evening meal.
The chief employment was agriculture, and there were crafts of every
kind. Trading, however, was forbidden; it was thought to lead to
covetousness. It was also forbidden to make weapons or any utensils or
tools that might injure men.

According to Josephus and other historians, the Essenes’ life was simple
and unpretentious. They did not marry, but other people sent their
children to them for training and admission to the order. They only ate
enough to stay healthy; and they were content to eat the same food day
after day. They felt that great expense was harmful to mind and body;
and they did not throw any clothes or shoes away until they were
completely worn out. They only acquired for themselves the minimum
required to maintain life.

The following special customs were observed by the Essenes:

• They had no slaves; all were free, mutually working for each other.

• Swearing oaths was forbidden as worse than perjury; “for that which
does not deserve belief without an appeal to God is already condemned.”

• The forbade anointing the body with oil or perfumes, because they
thought that having a rough exterior was praiseworthy.

• It was compulsory to bathe in cold water before meals, after the
functions of nature, and after coming into contact with lower Essene
classes or strangers.

• They wore white clothing all the time.

• They required great modesty. In performing natural functions they dug
a foot-deep hole with their pickax, which they always carried, covered
themselves with a mantle (so as not to offend God), and covered the hole
when they were finished. While bathing, they tied the ever-present apron
around their loins.

• They sent gifts of incense to the temple, but they did not offer
animal sacrifices because they thought their own sacrifices were more
valuable.

• Their common meals had many characteristics of sacrificial feasts. The
food was prepared by priests with the observance of certain rites of
purification; and an Essene could not eat any food but this.

Essene Theology

The Essene theology was basically Jewish, with an absolute belief in
God. Next to God, the name of Moses the lawgiver was an object of great
reverence, and whoever blasphemed either God or Moses was sentenced to
death. In their worship, the Scriptures were read and explained. The
Sabbath was so strictly observed they did not even move vessels or
perform the functions of nature. Their priesthood closely paralleled the
Aaronic priesthood.

They had a strong belief in angels and revered them highly. Novices had
to swear to preserve the names of the angels.

Concerning their doctrines of the soul and of immortality, Josephus
writes: “They taught that bodies are perishable, but souls immortal, and
that the souls dwelt originally in the eternal ether, but being debased
by sensual pleasures united themselves with bodies as if with prisons.
But when they are freed from the fetters of sense, they will joyfully
soar on high as if delivered from long bondage. To the good souls is
appointed a life beyond the ocean, where they are troubled by neither
rain nor snow nor heat, but where the gentle zephyr is ever blowing…But
to the bad souls is appointed a dark, cold region full of unceasing
torment.”

The Essenes had peculiar conduct with respect to the sun. They turned to
the sun while prayer, in contrast to the Jewish custom of turning toward
the temple.

Essenism seems to have been Pharisaism in the highest degree. It was,
however, influenced by foreign systems of theology and philosophy,
including possibly Buddhism, Parseeism, Syrian heathenism, and
Pythagoreanism.

Bibliography:

Josephus, Antiquities, xviii,1,5; Wars, II,8,2

Schuerer, Jewish People, Vol. II

Edersheim, Life and Times of the Jesus the Messiah,

Brownlee, W.H., “A Comparison of the Covenanters of the Dead Sea Scrolls
with Pre-Christian Jewish Sects”, in The Biblical Archaeologist, Vol.
XIII, Sept. 1950, pp. 50-72.

Unger, Merrill F., Unger’s Bible Handbook

