---
title: Exhortation
layout: lesson
---


<sup>**Preach**</sup>**, Exhort, Rebuke**

This article is an examination of several New Testament ideas related to
various types of teaching. In particular, we are looking at several
English words, and their Greek sources, for information about how Bible
teaching is to be used in different contexts.

**Speak**: from **lalew** (**laleo)**

**Preach**: from **khrussw** (**keiruso**)

**Teach**: from **didask\`w** (**didasko**)

**Exhort**: from **parakalew** (**parakaleo**)

**Reprove and Rebuke**: from **elegkw** (**elegko**)and**epitimaw**
(**epitimao**)

These words refer to differences in teaching methods which are applied
to various requirements for spiritual training and discipline.

**Preaching** and **teaching** refer to the exposition of Bible doctrine
principles which a pastor-teacher presents to a congregation as a group.

**Exhortation** is the communicated by urging and encouraging of a local
church body which is designed to lead them to conduct worthy of the Lord
Jesus Christ. Exhortation plays an important part in church life, and
many examples are found in the New Testament in the ministries of the
apostles.

**Rebuke** is a type of teaching used when individual or congregational
discipline are necessary, when it is necessary to speak with some force,
or even confrontationally, in order to correct some serious problem
affecting the local body. Most instances of one person’s rebuking
another person are shown to be unjustified; but brotherly correction is
sometimes necessary.

**Reproof** is used to correct or criticize someone with the intent of
correcting some fault, and it is linked with the ideas of discipline and
instruction.

Exposition of Titus 2:15
========================

**These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no
man despise thee.**

“These things” refers to the sound doctrine which Titus was commanded to
speak. And the rest of chapter 2 provides illustrations of the type of
teaching that is to be done.

“**speak**” the present active imperative of (**laleo**).

This is a continuous action imperative of the Greek verb. Titus’s orders
are to keep on communicating Bible truth in order to straighten out the
problems on Crete. The content of his teaching is to be “these things”.

In fact, these three verbs are all imperatives, commands to speak,
exhort, rebuke.

“**exhort**”, (**parakaleo**) “to comfort; to admonish”

Here is one of the key words of the Christian experience. The Holy
Spirit is called the Paraclete, because He comforts, and He admonishes
and convicts of sin.

Christians are commanded to “exhort” one another. Sometimes that calls
for a comforting ministry, and sometimes it calls for straight talk.

In this verse, it is the meaning “admonish” that is meant. The Greek
scholars say that this is true whenever the word (**parakaleo**) is
followed by (**elegko**) “rebuke”, as it is here.

“**rebuke**”, (**elegko**), “to rebuke”

These are three approaches to making one point of doctrine.

1.  There are several types of Christian. Some learn easily through
    teaching and respond with faith as each principle is laid down.

2.  Other require bracing, the pointed example, the warning, the
    admonishment.

3.  A few require serious rebuke, amounting to a verbal slap to wake
    them up.

The sense of this verse is that, if speaking doesn’t get the idea across
to the listeners, then move up to admonishment. And remembering that
some of the people Titus is dealing with are “gainsayers”, he may have
to increase the intensity to the point of offering “rebuke”.

Now this third method is not necessarily desirable, and it is the slow,
painful method of learning. But it is necessary in some cases,
especially with some believers who are already indoctrinated in some
system of legalism or emotionalism.

But we see in Titus 3:10,11 that the “heretic”, who does not respond to
any teaching, must be “rejected”, so rebuke is not too strong a
treatment if the alternative is to be made to leave the congregation.

Remember that it is Titus who is being commanded to “speak, exhort,
rebuke”.

It takes a very discerning and advanced believer to know how to admonish
or rebuke properly. It takes experience and training, or other believers
can be blown out of the water by misguided “admonishment”. When a novice
believer tries to “rebuke” someone, it is often no more than
self-righteous criticism.

“**with all authority”**

Titus’s authority comes from God, so he can teach with dogmatic
authority.

“**let no man despise thee.”**

The verb here is (**periphroneo**), literally “to think around”.
Combined with the negative the meaning becomes “disregard”, or “don’t
let anyone disregard or reject what you are teaching with all authority.

This refers to anyone in the congregation. It would seem that the
teacher would find it impossible to obey this command, because there is
no way he can control the volition of all the believers in his church.
While the objective of the communication is to allow the Word to
motivate the volition of the Christians, the pastor does not have a key
to turn a person’s volition on or off.

Anyone who teaches the Word of God must be as well prepared as possible
and be able to teach authoritatively. Authority, or regard, or respect,
is not a mantle one can put on. It is not a title that can be assumed.

People will listen and respond to the Word of God accurately and
authoritatively taught, because it \*is\* the Word of God, not the ideas
of men.

That is why the emphasis in Titus is on “sound doctrine”, “preaching”,
so that the teacher can “exhort and convince the gainsayers”. It is the
Word of God that is convincing, not the opinions, ideas, or sermonizing
of someone who just wants to hold an audience.

Preaching (keirugma)
====================

The word “preach” is found in many places in the New Testament (KJV);
however, it has been translated from several different Greek words. For
example, in 1 Cor. 1:17, the phrase “preach the Gospel” comes from
**eujaggelivzw** (**euangelidzo**); while in 1:18 we see the phrase “the
preaching of the cross”, which is **‘‘.** You
can see that the translators took some liberties with their use of the
word “preach”.

The Greek verb **khrussw** (**keiruso**) was commonly used in ancient
times to refer to public proclamation or public teaching, and there are
many NT verses where it is found. A complete listing can be found in a
Greek concordance.

The noun **** (**keirux**) refers to the “proclaimer; publisher;
messenger” who is making the proclamation. Thus,

**1 Tim. 2:7**, “Whereunto I (Paul) am ordained a preacher (**keirux**),
and an apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not;) a teacher of
the Gentiles in faith and truth.” (Likewise in 2 Tim. 1:11)

In 2 Pet. 2:5, Abraham is called a “preacher (**keirux**) of
righteousness”.

The word **keirux** was used in several ways in ancient times. The
**keirux** was a “publisher”, or “herald”, in the sense that he would
broadcast important news to townspeople. The person making official
proclamations or announcements to the public was called **keirux**, a
sort of town crier.

A man assigned to carry messages between enemies on a battlefield was
also called **keirux**.

The message of the **keirux** is the **** (**keirugma**). The
**keirugma** is what was given to the **keirux** to proclaim. The
originator of the message may have been a battlefield officer or a
public official.

In the Bible, the **keirux** is the preacher, the **keirugma** is his
message, and keiruso is the act of preaching.

The English word “preaching” would be correct if it were used in its
primary etymological sense of “proclaiming before the public”, the
meaning which is derived from the Latin,*praedicere*. However, the
modern use of “delivering a moral discourse or religious message of any
kind and in any manner” does not give the meaning of **keirugma**. There
is no finger-pointing or arm waving in **keirugma**.

1.  The emphasis of **keirugma** is on the message. Someone in
    authority, who has something to communicate, gives the message to a
    messenger, the **keirux**, preacher, who passes the information on
    to someone else, usually in a public setting. It is expected that
    there will be attentive hearers who will be receptive to the message
    and who expect to derive some benefit from the message.

2.  The messenger does not proclaim his own viewpoint, his own political
    opinions, his own grievances. The message is another person’s
    communication. The public proclamation is not the platform for him
    to expound his own theories, to support his side in a debate, talk
    about his own projects, or get things off his chest. The **keirux**
    does not call the people together for an important proclamation,
    then, instead, lecture them on some private matter not associated
    with the real message.

3.  The Bible teacher gets his **keirugma** from God Himself, as
    revealed in the Word of God. Correct preaching is done by making the
    message clear to the people who are listening to the proclamation.
    Public teaching protects the privacy of the believer. Confining
    himself to the message, the preacher does not unduly influence the
    listeners with personality dynamics or bullying techniques. The
    listener can accept or reject the message in private.

Exhortation (parakleisis)
=========================

from International Standard Bible Encyclopedia

The NT word for “exhort” is **parakaléō**, a word with various
translations for its 103 uses in the NT (fifty-four in the writings of
Paul). It can mean either “call” in the sense of “summon,” “invite,”
“address,” or “speak to” someone, the meaning then being dependent upon
the nature of the call. This second sense is predominant in the NT with
**parakaléō** meaning not only “exhort,” but also “request” and
“comfort.”

When the term is used for “exhorting,” it refers to that urging and
encouraging addressed to those of the community of faith which is
“designed to lead them to conduct worthy of the Gospel” (1 Thess.
4:1,10). It is more than just an appeal to morality, inasmuch as it has
for its basis and presupposition the action of God in Jesus Christ for
salvation.

The acceptance of this offer of grace involves obligations for life and
conduct. Mutual exhortation in the community is desired also by the
author of Hebrews (3:13). While some passages indicate no sharp,
polemical, or critical sides to the exhortations (1 Thess. 3:2), other
passages have surrounding terms and contexts that make it clear just how
serious and urgent the exhorting is to be (1 Thess. 5:14; 2 Thess. 3:12;
1 Pet. 5:1).

That this exhorting played an important part in the life of the early
Church is seen by the use of the word paraklé̄sis, meaning “exhortation.”
In Pisidian Antioch the rulers of the synagogue asked Paul and Barnabas
if they had any “word of exhortation” for the congregation (Acts 13:15).
The remarks that follow provide an example of the “word of exhortation,”
which was probably “a synagogue expression for the sermon which followed
the Scripture lessons” (Bruce, Acts, p. 261; cf. 1 Tim. 4:13). This is
the same expression used by the author of Hebrews to describe the book’s
literary character (13:22), thus making it a kind of “homily in written
form” (Bruce, Hebrews, p. 413). The encouraging and comforting aspects
of an “exhortation” are seen in the rejoicing of the congregation of
Antioch when they received the letter from the Jerusalem Council (Acts
15:31) and in the words of wisdom of Prov. 3:11f quoted in He. 12:5f.

#### Bible references to exhortation (King James Version)

**Acts 2:40**. And with many other words did he testify and **exhort**
saying, Save yourselves from this untoward generation.

**Acts 27:22**. And now I **exhort** you to be of good cheer; for there
shall be no loss of any man’s life among you, but of the ship.

**2 Cor. 9:5**. There I thought it necessary to **exhort** the brethren,
that they would go before unto you, and make up before hand your bounty,
whereof you had notice before, that the same might be ready, as a matter
of bounty, and not as of covetousness.

**1 Thess. 4:1**, Furthermore then we beseech you, brethren, and
**exhort** you by the Lord Jesus, that as you have received of us how
you ought to talk and to please God, so you would abound more and more.

**1 Thess. 5:14**. Now we **exhort** you, brethren, warn them that are
unruly, comfort the feebleminded, support the weak, be patient toward
all men.

**2 Thess. 3:12**. Now them that are such we command and **exhort** by
our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own
bread.

**1 Tim. 2:1**. I **exhort** therefore, that, first of all,
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for
all men.

**1 Tim. 6:2**. And they that have believing masters, let them not
despise them, because they are brethren; but rather do them service,
because they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. These
things teach and **exhort**.

**2 Tim. 4:2**. Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season;
**reprove**, **rebuke**, **exhort** with all longsuffering and doctrine.

**Titus 1:9**. Holding fast the faithful word as he has been taught,
that he may be able by sound doctrine both to **exhort** and convince
the gainsayers.

**Titus 2:6**. Young men likewise **exhort** to be sober minded.

**Titus 2:9**. **Exhort** servants to be obedient unto their own
masters, and to please them well in all things, not answering again.

Rebuke (elegko)
===============

Rebuke is the task of convincing people to repent (to re-think a
viewpoint) and to decide in favor of God’s will in a matter.

The Greek meanings of the word are:

(1) to disgrace; to put to shame; to dishonor

(2) to convince, to refute, to disprove, to supply truth, to give
evidence.

(3) to examine, to question, to prove or attest.

Examples of Rebuking
--------------------

Here is a case of one believer rebuking another believer. Note the steps
that must occur before a matter is made public.

**Matthew 18:15-17.**Moreover if your brother shall trespass against
you, go and tell him his fault between you and him alone: if he shall
hear you, you hast gained your brother.

But if he will not hear *you*, *then* take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established.

And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell *it* unto the church: but if
he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto you as a heathen man and
a publican.

Then, John the Baptist rebuke Herod.

**Luke 3:19**. But Herod the tetrarch, being **reproved** by him for
Herodias his brother Philip’s wife, and for all the evils which Herod
had done,

Accusing Jews were convicted by their own consciences.

**John 8:9.** And they which heard *it*, being convicted by *their own*
conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, *even* unto
the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst.

Sometimes rebuke is the ministry of the Holy Spirit.

**John 16:7-11**. Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for
you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come
unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you.

And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment:

Of sin, because they believe not on me;

Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more;

Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.

The value of rebuke in witnessing and teaching.

**1 Cor. 14:20-25.  **Brethren, be not children in understanding:
howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding be men.

In the law it is written, With *men of* other tongues and other lips
will I speak unto this people; and yet for all that will they not hear
me, saith the Lord.

Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them
that believe not: but prophesying *serveth* not for them that believe
not, but for them which believe.

If therefore the whole church be come together into one place, and all
speak with tongues, and there come in *those that are* unlearned, or
unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?

But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not, or *one*
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all:

And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down
on *his* face he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a
truth.

Rebuke to correct a problem.

**1 Tim 5:20.**Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may
fear.

**The Content of the Rebuke is Bible doctrine.**

**John 3:20,21.**For every one that does evil hates the light, neither
comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

But he that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest, that they are wrought in God.

**READ Ephesians 5:8-15**

**2 Tim. 4:2.**Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season;
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine.

**Principles of Rebuke**

The objective is to convince a reasonable person.

There must be rapport; an open teaching or witnessing situation.

There must be no “corrupt communication”.

**Eph. 4:29.**Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth,
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister
grace to the hearers.

There must be no name calling, bullying, yelling and pounding.

**Titus 1:9,**That he may be able by sound doctrine to exhort and
convince the gainsayers.

Bible doctrine will not be received by someone who is defensive, angry,
embarrassed. **Elegko** is not a chewing out; it is a presentation of
doctrine.

Severe Rebuke (epitimao)
------------------------

The New Testament maintains very heavy restrictions on rebuke,
forbidding rebuke except as brotherly correction, and teaching effective
threatening and reproof as the prerogative of God and Christ alone.

It is only with restriction that **epitimao** is used of human threats
and reproofs. Thus when Jacob rebukes Joseph because of his presumptuous
dreams, we see later that the rebuke is not justified.

**Genesis 37:10.** And he told *it* to his father, and to his brethren:
and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, What *is* this dream that
thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come
to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?

The servants of Boaz are tempted to reprove the foreign gleaner, but
their master forbids it.

**Ruth 2:16.** And let fall also *some* of the handfuls of purpose for
her, and leave *them*, that she may glean *them*, and rebuke her not.

If men have any right of **epitimao** among themselves, it can only be
in terms of judicial, paternal or fraternal correction. However, we
should take to heart the reproofs of the wise.

**Prov. 17:10.**A reproof enters more into a wise man, than a hundred
stripes into a fool.

The word **epitimao** is used for rebuke when the disciples try to drive
the mother away with severe words; but they are over the top with their
criticism, as Jesus admonishes them.

**Mark 10:13,14.** And they brought young children to him, that he
should touch them: and *his* disciples rebuked those that brought
*them*.

But when Jesus saw *it*, he was much displeased, and said unto them,
Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of
such is the kingdom of God.

Peter attempted (**epitimao**) to turn the Lord from his path, but Jesus
resisted this with His own (**epitimao**).

**Mark 8:32,33.**And he spoke that saying openly. And Peter took him,
and began to rebuke him.

But when he had turned about and looked on his disciples, he rebuked
Peter, saying, Get behind me, Satan: for you savor not the things that
be of God, but the things that be of men.

There is one case where strong rebuke is allowed to go unchallenged.
This is the case of the thief on the cross; and the rebuke is not from a
superior position, but from a spirit of humility.

**Luke 23:39,40.**And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on
him, saying, If you be Christ, save yourself and us.

But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Do you not fear God, seeing
you are in the same condemnation?

