---
title: Godliness 1col 
layout: lesson
---


Godliness **-**

This is a study of the Greek word  (**eusebeia**), used in the
New Testament to express the idea of inner piety, spiritual maturity, or
godliness. In Titus 1:1, the apostle Paul states that he is an apostle
of Jesus Christ according to the criterion of the faith of the chosen
people of God who have a full and applied knowledge of the truth which
is the standard for godliness.

The word **eusebeia** has an interesting history. It was first used by
the Greek poet, Homer, in about 1000 BC. From Homer the word came into
use in the classical Greek of Athens (Attic Greek) where it referred to
personal piety in the fulfillment of human relationships. It was also
used to describe a person who was faithful in fulfilling his duties to
whatever Greek gods dominated the city in which he lived. The Attic
Greek word always referred to the outward expression of piety, such as
the giving of gifts to the god, participation in sacrifices and worship,
or making a show of religion in public.

As the word **eusebeia** began to be used in the **koine** Greek, it
came to mean inner piety, or spirituality, a duty which the believer
owes to God in the inner man. The principle in the Titus context is that
of the control or filling of the holy spirit which produces qualities of
conformity to Christ.

The following scripture passages contain the word **eusebeia**,
invariably translated godliness (in the KJV). Read these verses along
with their contexts before continuing in the next section.

Acts 3:12

1 Tim. 2:2; 3:16; 4:7,8; 6:3,5,6,11

2 Tim. 3:5

2 Pet. 1:3,6,7; 3:11

Principles of eusebeia

A true man of God has qualities of inner piety which is the
characteristics of a spiritually mature person. This is not a phony
facade put on to please or impress people. The source of this godliness
is the word of God. The godly person has not only learned doctrine
academically, but he has also seen that word applied to his life in
edification over a period of years.

Spirituality is an absolute quality, depending on a believer’s walk with
the Lord, and particularly on his maintaining his fellowship with the
Lord through confession. But none of this is visible.

So, how can you tell when true spirituality and maturity are present?
How do you know the difference between a godly man and one who is merely
well educated and in control of himself? A carnal believer, the novice
Christian, can be moral, can use the right vocabulary, can wear a suit
and carry a Bible. He can fool some of the people some of the time.

But the godly believer is known by his fruits also called the fruit of
the Holy Spirit and things that an unbeliever, or the carnal believer,
cannot produce. Godliness is produced in the life of a Christian who is
both learning doctrine and growing thereby through edification.

Read Gal 5:19-21 about the works of the flesh.

The works of the flesh are obvious enough. They are the product of an
inner life controlled by the sin nature, by the trends and lusts of the
soul. As a Christian grows in Christ, he gains victory over areas of
weakness. The Christian way of life is characterized by the putting away
of negatives, the sin that so easily besets and by putting on the new
man.

Read Gal. 5:22-26

Read Eph. 4:17-25.

The new man not only lives in the spirit which is **not visible**, but
he also walks in the spirit which is **visible**. One of the great
themes of the epistle to Titus is that of the outward walk, which is a
demonstration to the world that the inner life which is claimed is
genuine. Three illustrations are given in Titus 2.

1. In Titus 2:4,5, Young women are to be taught how to lead godly lives
so that “the word of God be not blasphemed.” We have a responsibility
for public opinion about the word of God.

2. In Titus 2:7,8, Titus himself is told to show himself a “pattern of
good works” and to have “sound speech that cannot be condemned” in order
not to supply detractors with ammunition for their criticisms.

3. And in Titus 2:9,10, Servants are to maintain godly lives in their
relations to their masters in order that they might “adorn the doctrine
of God our Savior in all things.” We are to live as decorations”to the
doctrine of God.

The whole letter to Titus is an inspired document which, among other
things, provides many illustrations (in chapters 1 and 2) of how
godliness (**eusebeia** ) is supposed to be observed in the outward
characteristics of believers of all ranks: overseers and elders, older
men, older women, younger women, younger men, servants and Titus
himself.

Godliness is the concept of the inward life and the outward appearance
of the fruit of the spirit.

For example, in the spiritual fruit of **love** we see genuine care and
regard for people, an impersonal love for people who are different, even
though they are enemies. This love results in the **philozenos** of
Titus 1:8. See the notes on Characteristics of Impersonal Love. Love is
the absence of mental attitude sins and sins of the tongue. The
negatives have been eliminated from the believer’s life so that (1) he
no longer hates, despises, disdains or envies other people, (2) he no
longer maligns or ridicules them, and therefore (3) he is free to have a
ministry with others that is not hindered by offensiveness or
bitterness.

**Joy** is the spiritual fruit which enables a Christian to have
happiness that does not depend on the details of life. He has a stable
mental attitude from looking to Jesus and trusting the Father for
everything. He does not fall into moody depression when things go wrong
or he is criticized of maligned. He does not fall into wide emotional
swings. He does not depend on others to prop up his happiness. I Tim.
6:6, “Godliness (**eusebeia**) with contentment is great gain…”

A believer who has **peace** is a master of the faith rest technique. He
is nearly unflappable, because he has a lot of practice in placing every
distress, every disaster, in the hands of the Lord. He is the most
relaxed person in the neighborhood. He does not have chronic worry about
the present or future. He knows that the Lord can handle everything. So
he is not paranoid. Even if someone is really out to get him, he is
relaxed and praying, even for the enemy who is plotting against him. He
places great confidence in the Lord, especially regarding death, knowing
and resting in the fact that being absent from the body means being
present with the Lord. So he is **not** one of those who “through fear
of death were subject to slavery all their lives.” (Heb. 2:15).

For homework, you can make up your own descriptions for the remaining
parts of the fruit of the spirit: longsuffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, temperance. Just remember that God’s plan for you is
that you continue to be a godly Christian.

