---
title: Holy Spirit Sustaining Ministry
layout: lesson
---

By R. B. Thieme, Jr., Pastor  
Berachah Church, Houston, Texas

During the period of the first advent, the humanity of Christ was sustained by the indwelling and filling of the Holy Spirit. The humanity of Christ had to be sustained by God the Holy Spirit, just as the members of the royal family, the church, would be sustained by the enabling power of the Holy Spirit during the Christian life.

**The Prophesy of this Ministry**

Isa. 11:1-3, 42:1, 61:1a.

**The sustaining ministry of the Holy Spirit occurs first at the virgin birth,**

Matthew 1:18-20; Heb 10:5.

The Holy Spirit is the source or agent of conception. The Father planned Christ’s human body. The Holy Spirit was the agent carrying out the mechanics of the virgin birth. He provided the perfect chromosomes which fertilized the female ovum. The Holy Spirit is thus the agent in the execution of the hypostatic union.

**The ministry of the Holy Spirit begins at the Incarnation:**John 3:34.

1.  Not only does the Holy Spirit indwell the body of Christ, but He
    also filled His soul.

2.  This is the total sustaining ministry to royalty. our Lord, in His
    humanity, was born into royalty as the son of David.

2.  His spiritual royalty is different. His spiritual royalty is being
    totally sustained by the Holy Spirit.

2.  There was no spiritual royalty in the Old Testament. The Holy Spirit
    had no permanent indwelling in the physical body of any Old
    Testament believer in Christ.

2.  Glorification of Christ by means of the ascension and session
    instituted battlefield royalty. This caused the age of Israel to be
    interrupted so that the royal family of God, the church, could be
    formed. This is accomplished by means of the baptism of the Holy
    Spirit, which is the Holy Spirit entering us into union with Christ.

6.  Therefore, the church age believer is also royalty by being in union
    with Christ. As royalty we have the privilege of being indwelt by
    God the Holy Spirit.

7.  Christ as King of kings and Lord of lords is true royalty.
    Therefore, His body is indwelt by the Holy Spirit and His soul is
    filled by the Holy Spirit. This is why church age believers have the
    permanent indwelling of the Holy Spirit and are commanded to be
    filled with the Holy Spirit.

8.  Thus, the total ministry of the Holy Spirit to the incarnate Christ
    has been continued in the church.

**The Ministry of the Holy Spirit Related to the Baptism of Jesus
Christ:**Matthew 3:13-17.

The dove speaks of the omnipotence of the Holy Spirit. Water represents
the kingdom of God. Christian converts identified themselves with the
kingdom of God by being baptized. They were testifying to the fact that
they no longer had any responsibility to Judaism. Our Lord in the water
represented the plan of God for our Incarnation in Christ. Christ in the
water represented to others His dedication to the plan of God.

**The Ministry of the Holy Spirit Related to the Public Ministry of
Christ:**Matthew 12:18.

Jesus quotes the prophesy of the Holy Spirit’s sustaining ministry of
Isa 42:1. In the same context, He says that His miracles were performed
in the power of the sustaining ministry of the Holy Spirit.

Lk 4:14-21 tells us that the teaching ministry of our Lord was also
performed in the power of the Holy Spirit.

**The Holy Spirit had a part in the resurrection of Christ**: Rom 8:11.

**The permanent indwelling of the Holy Spirit is a guarantee of
resurrection for the royal family**: 1 Pet 3:18-19.

**The sustaining ministry of the Holy Spirit is transferred to the royal
family.**

-   Just as the Holy Spirit sustained the humanity of Christ during the
    incarnation, so now the Holy Spirit sustains the believer during his
    life.

-   Jesus Christ was sustained as perfect royalty; we as church age
    believers are sustained as sinful royalty.

-   The strategic victory of Christ demands the tactical victory of the
    royal family on earth during the intensified stage of the angelic
    conflict.

-   The total ministry of the Holy Spirit, which never occurred before
    Christ, includes both the permanent indwelling of our human body and
    the filling of our soul. This is the ministry of the Holy Spirit to
    royalty only.

-   This ministry to the royal family demands the filling of the Holy
    Spirit and applied doctrine also known as edification. This is why
    Paul wrote in Gal. 4:19, “until Christ is formed in you.” This is
    synonymous with the believer’s spiritual self esteem, which is the
    beginning of spiritual adulthood.

    -   This is why we are commanded in Eph 5:18; Gal 5:16, to be filled
        with the Spirit and to walk by means of the Holy Spirit.

-   The sustaining ministry of the Holy Spirit is then transferred from
    the resurrected glorified Christ at the right hand of the Father, to
    the royal family of God on earth

-   The believer is commanded to avail himself of the sustaining
    ministry of the filling of the Holy Spirit, Rom 13:14.

-   The filling of the Holy Spirit sets aside the lust pattern of the
    old sin nature which distracts from the perception and application
    of Bible doctrine.

**The Royal Family’s Glorification of Christ through the Ministry of the
Holy Spirit.**

The purpose of the sustaining ministry of the Holy Spirit in the church
age is to glorify Christ, John 7:38-39. Rivers of living water means the
permanent indwelling of the Holy Spirit. Compare John 16:13-14 to the
previous verse.

It is the present ministry of the Holy Spirit to glorify Christ. He
accomplishes this through the metabolization of doctrine and the many
expressions of that doctrine that come from maturity.

Edification or growth in Christ causes the believer to be a letter of
commendation written by the Holy Spirit and read by men of our
generation, 2 Cor 3:1-3. The letter of commendation principle is the
royal family walking in maturity.

At the point of spiritual self esteem, there exists in the soul of the
believer a balance of residency between the filling of the Holy Spirit
and maximum applied Bible truth resident in the soul .

At this point Christ is formed in you, Gal 4:19, and the indwelling of
the Holy Spirit becomes a real working power, Eph 3:16-17; **Acts 1:8.**

The fulfillment of the transitional ministry of the Holy Spirit and its
results in the life of the believer are found in Phil. 1:20-21.

“For me to live is Christ and to die is gain.”

