---
title: Inheritance
layout: lesson
---


**Glory of God 2**

**Inheritance**

We have an inheritance from God the Father because we share the destiny
of Christ. The main feature of the doctrine of predestination is that we
share Christ’s destiny.

**Eph. 1:11,** “also we have obtained an inheritance, having been
predestined according to His purpose who works all things after the
counsel of His will,”

Jesus Christ, as the Son of God, and as the victor in the spiritual
conflict, is the heir of all things. Heb. 1:1-4

Inheritance is based on son ship:

**John 1:12**, “But as many as received Him, to them He gave the right
to become children of God, even to those who believe in His name,”

**Rom. 8:16, 17**, “The Spirit Himself bears witness with our spirit
that we are children of God,”

“and if children, heirs also, heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ,
if indeed we suffer with Him in order that we may also be glorified with
Him.”

**Gal. 3:26-29**, “For you are all sons of God through faith in Christ
Jesus.”

“For all of you who were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves
with Christ.”

“There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free man,
there is neither male nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus.”

“And if you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham’s offspring, heirs
according to promise.”

To inherit from God, a person must possess the life of God, that is,
salvation resulting in eternal life.

**Titus 3:5-7**, “He saved us, not on the basis of deeds which we have
done in righteousness, but according to His mercy, by the washing of
regeneration and renewing by the Holy Spirit,”

“whom He poured out upon us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior,”

“that being justified by His grace we might be made heirs according to
the hope of eternal life.”

**1 John 5:11, 12**, “And the witness is this, that God has given us
eternal life, and this life is in His Son.”

“He who has the Son has the life; he who does not have the Son of God
does not have the life.”

Therefore, salvation is the qualification for inheriting from God. Col.
1:9-14

As joint heirs with Christ, we also share Christ’s election.

**Heb. 9:15**, “And for this reason He is the mediator of a new
covenant, in order that since a death has taken place for the redemption
of the transgressions that were committed under the first covenant,
those who have been called may receive the promise of the eternal
inheritance.”

Our heritage is related to the doctrine of eternal security.

**1 Pet. 1:3-5**, “Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who according to His great mercy has caused us to be born again
to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
dead,”

“to obtain an inheritance which is imperishable and undefiled and will
not fade away, reserved in heaven for you,”

“who are protected by the power of God through faith for a salvation
ready to be revealed in the last time.”

The indwelling of the Holy Spirit is the down payment on our
inheritance. Eph. 1:14

Abraham’s inheritance is the pattern and illustration of the heritage of
believers as described in Romans 4:9-16.

