---
title: Israel Preeminence
layout: lesson
---


**Preeminence of Israel 2**

**The Preëminence of Israel**

The nation of Israel had an extraordinary beginning, one of the most
unusual of any race in history. The origin of Israel beginning with
Abraham’s departure from Ur in Chaldea, the deliverance of Israel from
Egypt in Moses time, and many other striking events, give the Jewish
race a unique place in the history of mankind.

The Jews are not only unique as a race, but they are also a branch of
the Semitic races, the descendants of Shem. Semitics include Arabs,
Syrians, Assyrians, Chaldeans, along with such tribes names in the OT as
the Moabites, Edomites, and the Midianites. Abraham was a Chaldean,
having been born and raised in Ur of Chaldea.

But it is the Jews who were the chosen nation, the people selected to
live under a Theocracy, with all the privileges and responsibilities of
that position. It is well to be warned against any form of
anti-Semitism. During the present Church Age, the Jews are under divine
judgment, and God does not permit any interference with His judgment.
Matt. 7:1 ff.

The doctrine of Israel’s preëminence is first declared in the Abrahamic
Covenant. Gen. 12:1-3; 13:15,16; 22:15-18; 26:3,4; Ex. 6:2-8. This
covenant is a reminder to us that long before our European ancestors
were painting themselves blue and green and worshipping rocks and trees,
God had taken a special man, Abraham, and created a special race of
people, by Grace, which had a flourishing intellectual society more than
1,000 years before the time of Christ.

Israel neither earned nor deserved this special attention. The Lord did
not choose them because of any merit on their part, or on Abraham’s
part. But the Abrahamic covenant guarantees the Jews two things: 1) the
Jews will live throughout history in spite of every Satanic attempt to
destroy them through anti-Semitism; and 2) the born-again Jews from
Abraham to the second coming of Christ will have a place forever that is
unique and fantastic in God’s plan. The  preëminence of Israel is based
on several important factors.

First, the preëminence of Israel is based upon their custodianship of
divine communication of revelation in written form. The Jews were
recipients of direct divine revelation from God; and they eventually
because custodians of the Canon of Scripture. Rom. 3:2. The presence of
doctrine and the teaching ministry of the Jews also provides a basis for
the preëminence of Israel. The nations Preëminence stems also from their
responsibility for writing the Scriptures and communicating them to the
world. The writers of the Old Testament were all Jews who had the gift
or office of prophet. In addition, all of the New Testament writers
except Luke were Jews.

The preëminence of Israel is also based on the uniqueness of the Mosaic
Law the significance of the attending ritual of circumcision.

Israel is distinct because they have a land which belongs to them
forever. No one else has been promised a piece of real estate by God.
The Palestinian Covenant is detailed in Gen. 15:18; Num. 34:1-12; Deut.
30:1-9; Josh. 1:3,4. This land goes from the Nile River to the Euphrates
and from the Mediterranean Sea to the Gulf of Akabah. The preëminence of
Israel is also based on having a King who will reign forever, Jesus
Christ of the line of David. 2 Sam. 7:8-16; Ps. 89:20-37.

The preëminence of Israel is based on the fact that, even though they
have been disciplined and scattered, they will be regathered and
restored at the Second Advent of Christ. Isa. 5:26-30; 10:19-23;
11:11-16; 14:1-3; 60:4-6; Joel 2:16 ff; Zech. 10:6-12. Therefore, the
Jews’ preëminence is related to their survival in spite of
anti-Semitism. Rev. 12; Zech. 14:16-21.

Finally, the preëminence of Israel is based on the pattern of Abraham’s
salvation. Gen. 15:6; Rom. 4:1-16,22,23. Born again Jews of all time
will participate in these promises.

