---
title: Judea
layout: lesson
---


**Judea 4**

**Judea, a Short History  
**From Alexander to Herod the Great  
Events of the 400 Silent Years

During the times of the Biblical patriarchs, the Canaanites dominated
the land which would eventually become known as Judea, or Palestine, the
promised homeland of the children of Israel. After the conquest of the
land under Joshua, the land was parceled out to the twelve tribes
according to the number of people in each tribe and the arability of the
land. The tribe of Judah claimed the region from south of Jerusalem to
the Negev desert. When David became king, he conquered Jerusalem, making
it the capital of the united kingdom.

The kingdom split up after Solomon’s death, and both Israel and Judah
suffered continual deterioration for many generations. The Assyrians
invaded Palestine in 721 B.C. and gained control of the north. In 606
B.C. and again in 586 B.C. the Babylonians under Nebuchadnezzar besieged
Jerusalem, eventually bringing the whole land under their domination and
taking many captives, including the prophet Daniel.

The Medo-Persian Empire under Cyrus overthrew the Babylonians, and later
Persian kings allowed captive Jews to return from Babylonia to their
native land to rebuild the Temple and the walls of Jerusalem (under Ezra
and Nehemiah). The Jews remained under Persian protection from about 500
B.C. to 330 B.C., at which time Persia was taken by Alexander the Great
and Judea came under Greek domination.

After the death of Alexander, Judea was ruled by the Greek families of
the Ptolemies or the Seleucids, depending on which one was strongest in
the area at the time. The Seleucid king, Antiochus IV Epiphanes,
attempted to force Greek culture upon Judea, including the worship of
the gods of the Greek pantheon. In December of 168 B.C., a sacrifice to
Zeus was offered on the altar of burnt offering in the Temple in
Jerusalem. Furthermore, an edict was sent out that an altar to Greek
gods was to be erected in every town in Palestine. Officers were
appointed to enforce the worship of Greek gods by every Jewish family,
and the disobedient were punished.

In the town of Modein, an old priest of the Lord, Mattathias, was
presiding over the religious affairs of the community. When one of the
Jewish people who had changed over to the Greek religion tried to offer
the first sacrifice to Zeus, Mattathias killed him. Mattathias then took
off for the mountains with his five sons and their families.

Many Jews flocked to the banner of Mattathias who became almost
overnight the leader of rebellion against the Greeks under Antiochus IV.
Among these were also the most pious sect of Jews, the HASIDIM (the
“pious ones”), who counted themselves champions of the Law, even unto
death. In 166 B.C., Mattathias died, having appointed his third son,
Judas, to lead the rebellion.

According to Josephus, Mattathias great-great-grandfather was called
Hasmon, so the family is known as the Hasmonean family.

According to 1 Maccabees 2, the surname of this now famous family was
Maccabee, or Maccabaeus. The name is taken by many to mean “the hammer”,
from the Hebrew word **maqqabi**. And so Judas was called, even before
he began his military career. At first the name Maccabees was applied to
the kinfolk of Judas, then to his close followers, and ultimately to all
those who were champions of liberty and Jewish religion in the Greek
period. Strictly speaking, the name should be applied only to the
descendants of Mattathias and his five sons.

The military genius of Judas Maccabaeus made the next years the most
stirring in Israelite history. In quick succession the army of the
Maccabees overthrew Syrian generals Appolonius, Seron, and Gorgias.
After the regent Lysias, ruling for the Seleucid kings, had been
defeated, he restored Temple worship in Jerusalem. Lysias, having
retreated back to HQ in Antioch, returned with a new army, and Judas had
to fall back into the Temple area. He escaped defeat then only because
there was a Greek insurrection at Antioch and another Greek was
threatening to take over Lysias’ regency. Lysias granted the Jews
religious freedom, but the Jews were still under Greek political rule.

Some of the Jews were satisfied with this and returned to their homes;
but the hard core followers of the Maccabees wanted political freedom
also. In 161 B.C., the Maccabees defeated a Greek army at Beth Horon,
but they were defeated a few months later by a much superior force.
Judas’ brother Jonathan took over leadership of the Maccabees and made
some progress through use of more diplomatic means; but he was made
prisoner in 143 B.C. and executed. The leadership now fell to Simon, the
last son of Mattathias still alive.

Simon succeeded in negotiating a treaty in May of 142 B.C., in which the
political independence of Judea was secured. Simon was given absolute
powers as both political leader and high priest of Judea. The first year
of his reign was the first of a new era of prosperity. In 135 B.C.,
however, Simon and his two older sons were murdered by Ptolemy, who had
married Simon’s daughter. Simon’s third son, Hyrcanus, who had been
warned of the assassination plot, became the heir of Simon’s kingship
over the Jews, and he soon carved out for himself a large and prosperous
kingdom. He ruled from 135 to 104 B.C., but during the later years the
kingdom was split by rivalry between Pharisees and Sadducees.

Hyrcanus was succeeded by his son, Aristobulus, for one year, then by
the brother of Alexander Jannaeus (103 to 76 B.C.) who was a friend of
the Sadducees. The general population was aligned with the Pharisees, so
they rose in revolt against Alexander; but the revolt was put down
savagely. With the death of Alexander Jannaeus, his widow, Salome
Alexandra, ruled as a friend of the Pharisees.

The Hasmoneans (Maccabees) thus spent two or three generations widening
the borders of Judea by diplomacy and force. By 78 B.C. they had
conquered Samaria, Edom, Moab, Galilee, Idumea, Transjordania, Gadara,
Pella, Gerasa, Raphia, and Gaza. Palestine extended as far as it had
under Solomon.

Salome’s sons, Hyrcanus II and Aristobulus II, fought for the
succession. They appealed to the Roman consul Pompey in 63 B.C., whose
victorious legions were in Damascus. Pompey decided in favor of
Hyrcanus, whereupon Aristobulus fortified himself in Jerusalem. Pompey
laid siege to Jerusalem, but the followers held out for three months,
the priests offering prayers and sacrifices in the Temple. But there
being no fighting on the Sabbath on the orders of Aristobulus, Pompey’s
troops were able to mine the walls and raise mounds for his battering
rams, without being hindered by the defenders. When the city fell,
twelve thousand Jews died; but Pompey left the Temple treasures intact
(Roman policy) exacting only a tribute of 10,000 talents of gold. The
territory conquered by the Hasmoneans was taken over by Rome. Hyrcanus
was made high priest and nominal ruler of Judea; but the real ruler was
Antipater of Idumea who had been appointed by Pompey as a reward for his
help in the campaign. The independent Jewish monarchy was ended, and
Pompey returned to Rome.

In 54 B.C., Crassus robbed the Temple of the treasures that Pompey had
spared. When news came that Crassus had been killed in battle (by the
Parthians at Carrhae in 53 B.C.), the Jews took the opportunity to
reclaim their freedom. But Longinus, Crassus successor in Palestine,
suppressed the revolt in 43 B.C. and sold 30,000 Jews into slavery in
Rome. Many of the Jews of the Roman Church were descendants of these
captives. In the same year the Parthians came down across the desert
into Judea, conquered the area, taking it from the Romans, and set up
Antigonus II, the last of the Maccabees, as puppet king. The Parthians
were Indo-Europeans from Russia and Turkestan, were kin of the Hittites,
and had joined Mithridates in his revolt against Rome in Asia Minor
(Pontus). The Parthian Empire had included Assyria and Babylonia by 100
B.C.

**Herod the Great**

Caesar Augustus (Octavian), now Princeps (first citizen) of the Roman
Empire after the death of Julius Caesar, appointed Herod, the son of
Antipater, king of Judea, and financed his Jewish army with Roman money.
Herod drove out the Parthians, protected Jerusalem from pillage, sent
Antigonus to Antony for execution, killed all the Jewish leaders who had
supported the puppet government, and entered into one of the most
colorful reigns in history, from 37 to 4 B.C.

Herod possessed intellect without morals, ability without scruple, and
courage without honor. He was like the Caesars in many respects. He
overlaid freedom with dictatorial order enforced by the military. He
beautified Jerusalem with Greek architecture and sculpture. He enlarged
his realm and made it prosper, achieving more by subtlety and intrigue
than by force of arms. He was broken by the treachery of his offspring.
He married many women and unwisely; and he knew every good fortune but
happiness.

According to Josephus, Herod had great physical bravery, strength, and
martial skill. He was a perfect marksman with javelin and bow, a mighty
hunter who killed forty wild beasts in one day. He was always able to
wind up on top of the heap even though enemies sought to discredit him
with Antony, Augustus, or Cleopatra. From every crisis he emerged
richer, more powerful than before.

Augustus judged Herod too great a soul for so small a kingdom and
restored all the cities of the Hasmoneans to him and wanted him to rule
over Syria and Egypt as well. He had become king by the help and money
of Rome; and the Jewish people were working night and day to free
themselves from Roman rule. So they hated Herod. Also, the fragile
economy of the country bent and broke under the strain of the taxes used
by the luxurious court and ambitious building program. He enlarged the
Temple of Zerubbabel, calling it too small, and enraging the people. His
own Temple was destroyed by Titus Vespasian in 70 A.D.

Herod’s sister persuaded him that his favorite wife, Mariamne, sister of
Aristobulus, and granddaughter of Hyrcanus II, was trying to poison him.
He had Mariamne tried and executed. Thereafter he was faced by continual
plots by his family, and he jailed some and executed others. As an old
man he broke down with sickness and grief. He suffered from dropsy,
ulcers, convulsions, and probably cancer. He died at the age of 69 hated
by all his people. It was said of him that he stole to the throne like a
fox, ruled like a tiger, and died like a dog. The Jewish kingdom was
divided among his three sons Philip, Herod Antipas, and Archelaus.

