---
title: Life of Christ
description: "the Person and Work of Christ, from His presence in eternity past, through His ministry in the feeding of the 5000."
layout: lesson
---

**The Person and Work of Jesus Christ**

*by Rev. Mark Perkins*

Table of Contents
-----------------
{:.no_toc}

* Table of Contents
{:toc}


Historical Introduction
-----------------------

> **John 1:1-5**, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God. He was with God in the beginning. Through him all
things were made; without him nothing was made that has been made. In him
was life, and that life was the light of men. The light shines in the
darkness, but the darkness has not understood it."

**Know from the beginning that Jesus was and is and forever will be the
Son of God.**

> **Luke 1:14**, "Many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things
> that have been fulfilled among us, just as they were handed down to us by
> those who from the first were eyewitnesses and servants of the word.
>
> Therefore, since I myself have carefully investigated everything from
> the beginning, it seemed good also to me to write an orderly account for
> you, most excellent Theophilus, so that you may know the certainty of the
> things you have been taught."

**Know from the beginning that this is the factual account of the Son of
God, that this is the most widely documented life and times in
history.**

> **1 John 1:14**, "That which was from the beginning, which we have
> heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked at and our
> hands have touched this we proclaim concerning the Word of life.
>
> The life appeared; we have seen it and testify to it, and we proclaim to
> you the eternal life, which was with the Father and has appeared to us.
>
> We proclaim to you what we have seen and heard, so that you also may
> have fellowship with us. And our fellowship is with the Father and with
> his Son, Jesus Christ.
>
> We write this to make our joy complete."

**Know from the beginning that this factual account changes lives. It
has changed mine, and it will change yours if you will listen and
believe.**

> **Gal 4:45**, “But when the fullness of time had come, God sent his Son,
born of a woman, born under law, to redeem those under law, that we
might receive the full rights of sons.”

**Know from the beginning that God’s timing is always right, and that He
sent His Son at just the right moment in human history.**

READ Isaiah 52:13 - 53:12

**Know from the beginning that the life of the Son of God was predicted
for many hundreds of years, and know that He had a destiny of sorrow and
a destiny of glory.**

### Dramatis Personae for the Opening Act

Mary: a young virgin, who is betrothed to Joseph, a carpenter. They are
residents of Nazareth, a small town in the hill country of Galilee;

Elizabeth: an older woman of the hill country of Judah, not far from
Jerusalem, and Mary’s cousin; her husband Zechariah, a priest in the
division of Abijah;

Wise men from the East;

Shepherds near Bethlehem;

Gabriel, an angel;

An anonymous angel;

Simeon, a righteous man who waits for the consolation of Israel;

Anna, a prophetess more than a hundred years of age, and a widow for
eighty four of those years a very pious woman;

Herod, the king over the Roman province of Judea an evil man full of
ambition.

### HEROD THE GREAT

Herod in many ways personifies the trouble in Israel at the time of
Christ. For a long time, hundreds of years, the Jews had lived under the
control of one nation or another, and they longed to be truly
autonomous. It seemed like whatever empire had the upper hand in history
would rule them.

If it wasn’t the Babylonians, then it was the Persians, when the
Persians took over. If it wasn’t the Persians, it was the Greeks, when
Alexander came rumbling through the ancient near east. If it wasn’t
Alexander, it was the Romans, after the death of Alexander and the
disintegration of his empire.

The Jews still understood that they were a holy people, set apart for
God. They always remembered that, if nothing else. They rankled under
the rule of Rome, and it especially rubbed them wrong that Herod, the
so-called Herod the Great had power over them.

Herod was worse than a Gentile; he was a half Jewish Idumean, a
descendant of Esau, a wild desert dwelling type. The Jews considered
them with no small amount of prejudice.

To make matters worse, Herod was hardly a model human being. He has been
called a monster one who was crafty and cruel, jealous and vain and
always quick to seek revenge when wronged.

He came to the throne over the Roman province of Judea through cunning
and manipulation of Marc Antony.

He had nine or ten wives. Even the historians lost count after a while.

On the smallest of suspicion he had even his favorite wife, Mariamne,
put to death, along with her sons Alexander and Aristobulus.

Even while on his own deathbed, just days before he died he had his own
son, his flesh and blood Antipater put to death.

Caesar Augustus was heard to say, “It is better to be Herod’s hog than
his own son!”

Again at his deathbed he ordered all the principle men in Israel to be
rounded up and placed in the local stadium, where they could be
surrounded by his soldiers and then slain when he died. The reason: so
that there would be great mourning at his death.

It must have been difficult for the Jews to read the Scriptures, and to
know that their destiny was so great, and yet have the reality so
different.

Understand, however, that this was Divine Judgment on the nation of
Israel; that they had neglected their relationship with God, and that
the situation was appropriate to their spiritual state. In this case the
outward circumstances reflected accurately the inward condition:
slavery.

It is no wonder, then, there was a great fascination in the nation of
Israel with the prophecies about the Messiah, The one who would come and
reestablish the greatness of their kingdom and their people.

A man who would rise up and smite their enemies and make them a free
people once again.

From time to time a fairly great and famous man would rise up, and there
would be some excitement about the possibility of his being the Messiah.

Of course, things would quiet down when he turned out to be quite human,
and the slavery of Israel droned on and on.

After a time there was even a certain amount of cynicism about the whole
deal.

The same phenomenon exists today with the fascination about the end
times and the return of Christ.

Herod tried bribing the Jews, so that they would like him, and he could
view himself as a successful ruler.

Julius Caesar had given Herod a fantastic and truly royal inaugural
celebration back in 37 B.C., when Herod took the throne. He always
longed for that past glory, when in fact the traditional Roman warning
of “sic transit gloria mundi” applied to him more than any other. The
bribes came in the form of a building program that was the very rival of
Solomon’s.

He built monuments and buildings in the Holy Land, and even rebuilt
their temple in magnificent fashion, topping it with a golden dome.

-   The rebuilding of the Temple was much like the building of the
    Winchester Mystery House in San Jose, California.

-   More was added every year. A higher roof here, an annex there all
    very magnificent.

-   When Herod died, his relatives took over the folly and the never
    ending program continued until it was finally finished in 66 AD,
    some 87 years after it was begun.

-   It is one of the great ironies of history that it was burned down
    just four years later when Jerusalem was destroyed.

Other buildings and monuments were undertaken.

-   A temple, a forum, and a theatre at Samaria.

-   A great Greco-Roman capital, a temple, and port at Caesarea.

-   The port was an engineering marvel that even today is remarked upon
    by the archaeologists who work at the site.

-   Luxurious palaces and fortified retreats were built at Masada,
    Jerusalem, Jericho, and Herodium, which was near Bethlehem.

-   In Jerusalem he had baths, a theatre, and a Hippodrome constructed.

-   He also promoted Greek and Roman games so that the people might be
    entertained.

All of these things struck a sour note as any bribe to a slave will. The
people really did not want these things. They wanted to be autonomous
and free. But in order to be truly free, any people must know God, and
that was exactly the problem in Israel.

Herod was the king. The people were unhappy. Their response to his
despotism is worthwhile to note.

### Jewish Responses To Herod’s Rule; The Maccabaean Revolt

Syria had one incredibly evil ruler by the name of Antiochus Epiphanes.
This man was so evil that he made Herod the Great look like a great
humanitarian by comparison. Antiochus was the prototype for the
Antichrist of the Tribulation.

In 168 B.C. he desecrated the Temple in Jerusalem by setting up an altar
to Jupiter Olympus, where he dedicated the use of the Temple to this
false God by offering up the flesh of a swine. This was the ‘abomination
of desolation’ of Daniel 11:31, “”His armed forces will rise up to
desecrate the temple fortress and will abolish the daily sacrifice. Then
they will set up the abomination that causes desolation."

Antiochus made a furious effort, with the help of the corrupt high
priesthood (who helped because of a bribe), to Hellenize the Jews.

The high priest himself, a man by the name of Jason, was power mad, and
attempted a coup in Jerusalem when Antiochus was mistakenly reported
dead during a military campaign in Egypt.

His brief reign was characterized by violence, but the real violence
would begin when Antiochus heard of the coup. He returned to Jerusalem
with his army, besieged it, and killed 40,000 Jews upon its capture, and
sold at least as many into slavery. Then he went back to Egypt.

Eventually, Antiochus awoke the ire of Rome, and he was arrested and
ordered to back off from Egypt or die. He did so, but he made another
stop at Jerusalem, where he took out his frustration on the Jews. He
entered the city on the Sabbath, and murdered thousands of men in the
synagogues, while enslaving the women and children. He defiled the
Temple in every way imaginable, and caused the daily ritual system to
cease entirely. This meant war.

During this time of great persecution there was a priest by the name of
Mattathias. He was an old man of noble blood, and he had retired to a
little town west of Jerusalem. There he was commanded to sacrifice on
the Pagan altar, and he refused. In fact, he became enraged when a
Judean came forward to sacrifice, and he struck the man, overthrew the
altar, called upon the faithful to follow him, and fled with his sons
into the wilderness.

This was the Maccabaean family. The example of Mattathias was followed
by many in various parts of the country. His story was well known, and
the idolatrous altars were being overthrown, and Jewish worship and
culture was being reestablished. The rigorous life of a rebel took its
toll on Mattathias, and he died just a year later, in 166 A.D.

The third son of Mattathias, Judas, took over for him in directing the
war for independence. He was a man full of energy and clever in the
running of the war. He was an expert at guerrilla warfare, attacking at
night, and at the most surprising times and places. Encouraged by early
success, he became even more bold, and defeated Antiochus’ head general,
Apollonius, at Bethhoron.

It was only a little while later that Antiochus left Jerusalem and left
the government to a man name Lysias. Lysias was a military dunce, and
Judas defeated his larger army at Emmaus, and later at Bethsura. Judas
was then able to occupy Jerusalem, where he purified the Temple.

Judas continued his triumphs on the military field, and after the battle
of Adasa, the Jews had almost won their independence. Almost. Bacchides
led another invading army, and this time the Jews were caught unaware.
Able to only muster a small group of men, and losing many of those on
the night before the battle, Judas was defeated, and died.

All that was gained seemed lost. The patriots were in a state of total
disorder, and it was only renewed persecution that brought them together
again.

The Jews again looked to the Maccabees, this time Jonathan, the youngest
son of Mattathias would be their champion. Jonathan would fight a
skillful defensive campaign in the Jordan Valley, and when a new king
took the throne in Syria, he gained support, and Israel a fair amount of
freedom.

Jonathan was made high priest, and there was peace in the land for some
20 years. Sadly, in 144 B.C. Jonathan fell victim to the treachery of a
man by the name of Tryphon, and was imprisoned in Ptolemais, in Galilee.
This act left just one Maccabee, Simon.

Simon had all along been a steady military leader, but had left the
national leadership to his brothers. Now it was his turn, and he placed
himself at the head of the patriot party. After a short while, Tryphon
put Jonathan to death, and seized the throne of Syria.

Simon had the wits to make an appeal for the freedom of the Jews to
Demetrius, a well known general with connections to Rome.

This appeal was accepted, and once again it seemed as though the Jews
would be free.

Although Mattathias had begun the rebellion over the issue of the Jewish
religion, after 32 years, the war, and political freedom became the
thing. Relationship with God had taken a back seat to military strategy
and tactics, and politics. And remember, that no nation can remain free
without a relationship with God.

At the time of Simon, in 143 B.C., Israel had apparently won their
freedom through military skill and political maneuvering. They had won
almost every battle that they had fought for 25 years. They had
successfully manipulated the political machines of their foreign
occupants.

They had done everything just right, but they had failed in the most
important regard: the spiritual life.

Just eight years after the apparent victory of Israel, Simon and two of
his sons was murdered by Ptolemaeus, and in 135 B.C. the nation of
Israel once again found itself on the brink of slavery.

John Hyrcanus was one of the two living sons of Simon. When he heard of
the death of his father, he marched with the army against Jericho.
Unfortunately, Ptolemaeus held a trump card: he had Simon’s widow,
John’s mother, captive, and the sabbatical year of the year of Jubilee
was just around the corner, so the siege of Jericho failed.

Seeing no further use for the woman, Ptolemaeus had her killed, and then
he fled to Philadelphia. Antiochus the sixth (not Epiphanes) then
invaded Judea, and besieged Jerusalem, and Hyrcanus and the army was
trapped there and placed into a desperate situation.

The Jews caught a break when a truce was granted for the passover feast,
and Hyrcanus took the opportunity to bargain with Ptolemaeus. Hyrcanus
compromised like crazy in order to gain the freedom of Israel, even
going to the extreme of opening David’s tomb to pay the tribute demanded
by the Syrian General.

He then went to Parthia to bargain further for the freedom of Israel,
and through compromise and manipulation was able to establish a treaty
that lasted for more than fifty years.

By 30 B.C., the line of the Maccabees had died out with the death of
Hyrcanus II, the grandson of Hyrcanus. His granddaughter was Mariamne,
who went on to marry Herod the Great.

Now, where were the Pharisees during all this time? Well, they had begun
to grasp for political power, so that they might more effectively carry
out their mission. At first they were on the side of the Maccabees, but
the more the rebels concentrated on the war, the further they got away
from strict observance of the Law, and so they earned the wrath of the
Pharisees.

Because of the gross compromises of Hyrcanus, and looting of David’s
tomb, more and more Jews went to the side of the Pharisees. After the
death of Hyrcanus I, his daughter became queen, and seeing the
handwriting on the wall, she abandoned her political power to Pharisees.

At the time of the birth of Christ, the Romans through Herod held the
outward political power, while the Pharisees held it internally. The
people found themselves under a double tyranny, and it was a difficult
time indeed.

Concluding principles:

-   Freedom without a relationship with God is in reality slavery.

-   War without a relationship with God is a waste.

-   Both slavery and freedom begin in the soul.

-   **John 8:32**, “Then you will know the truth, and the truth will set
    you free.”"

-   **Gal 5:1**, "It is for freedom that Christ has set us free. Stand
    firm, then, and do not let yourselves be burdened again by a yoke of
    slavery.

### THE PHARISEES

The word “Pharisee” is the Greek translation from the Aramaic, and it
means to be separated. To the Pharisee, this meant a separation from the
influences of the Gentiles on their religion and culture.

We have a very similar thing occurring in our nation today. The Pagan
influences in our society are waging war against the marvelous culture
and vital relationship with God that our forefathers enjoyed. It is a
natural and good response to do what you can to protect what is good; to
defend it from those who so zealously attempt to destroy it.

Every time that the nation of Israel fell under the rule of another
nation whether Babylon or Persia or Greece or Rome, they felt like they
were losing a little bit more of themselves. The foreign nationals would
come in with their foreign Gods and foreign customs and foreign games,
and away would go just a little bit more of what was truly Jewish.

The emphasis of the Pharisees was in the area of the Mosaic Law. It was
their aim to protect and uphold the Law of Moses, so that the pollution
of foreigners and their foreign Gods would not destroy what made the
nation of Israel so distinct, and so great in their time. This is why
they came to hate Herod so very much.

For some four hundred years before the birth of Christ they strove to
fulfill their mission as they saw it. Such an aim was not so bad, but in
carrying out that aim they became so extreme as to be parody of the Law.

Their undue attention to detail, and especially their imagination in
creating details which did not exist resulted in their missing the point
of the Law entirely.

The Law was designed to bring the people of Israel to a relationship
with the living God through the provision of knowledge essential to the
maintenance of that relationship. It was not designed to be carried out
just for the sake of accomplishment and preservation.

The very best way for the Pharisees to have accomplished their aim would
have been to perpetuate the Law through having a relationship with God
by it.

Their teachings about religious matters are quite a revelation of their
character.

They tried ardently to avoid all physical contact with the Pagan
Gentiles. Even touching one would make them ceremonially unclean. This
is why the Pharisees took such great offense at Christ’s close
association with the tax collectors and sinners.

They always stuck to the letter of the Law, without a hint of
flexibility. They defined exactly many things that were not set forth in
the Law. They were obsessed with the Sabbath, and were constantly
specifying and clarifying what could and could not be done; how far one
could travel; exactly how much could be lifted; what the precise
exceptions were. Of course, the point that the Sabbath was designed for
concentration on God was lost on them.

The Pharisees were consumed with the idea of appearance. They would pray
long and loud in public. They would contrive special hats to cover their
eyes, so that they might not see a woman (these were called the bloody
Pharisees, because they were always running into things).

Their motivation is equally revealing. They did what they did at the
time of Christ for two reasons: to gain power, and to avoid judgment.
The latter is especially interesting in the light of 1 John 4:18, “There
is no fear in love. But perfect love drives out fear, because fear has
to do with punishment. The one who fears is not made perfect in love.”

They were fervent in their legalism lest they offend God, and thus come
under His judgement in the eternal state. But you cannot have a true
relationship with one you fear. You must have confidence before God, and
that was one thing the Pharisee did not have.

Another motivation, the lust for power, had been hanging around the
Pharisees for quite some time. Their mission, though warped in its
execution, was quite a noble one. They looked at their mission, and
decided that they needed power, political power in order to carry it
out. Much like their association with the Law, their attempts to gain
power led to their addiction to it, and its rule over them.

Perhaps the best characterization of their addiction to power was their
success in the Maccabaean Revolt, which occurred a couple of centuries
before the birth of Christ.

In the intermediate period between the death of Alexander in 323 B.C.
and the establishment of Roman control from 63 B.C. onward, Israel
remained under the nominal control of Greece and even Syria.

### THE SADDUCEES

This religious group known as Sadducees came into being about 300 years
before Christ. They are characterized by their aristocracy, their
cultural surrender to the Greeks and others, and their opposition to
everything the Pharisees stood for.

Their name comes from the Aramaic Sadduqim, which meant ‘righteousness’.
However, those who were in opposition to them called them saddiqim,
which meant ‘destruction’.

They came from the ranks of the priests and high priests of Israel,
during the time of the Greek occupation. Their desire was to give in to
the Hellenizing influences of the Greeks, and thus retain their favor.

The Sadducees had a lot to lose to the occupation forces of the Greeks,
because they were mostly prosperous, aristocratic people. In order to
maintain their lifestyles and possessions, they placated the Greeks,
giving in to their cultural and even religious influences.

During the Maccabaean revolt, they stayed in the background. They were
in fact very unpopular. When Jonathan Maccabee was appointed high priest
by popular demand, it looked like the Sadducees would be gone forever.
At the time, almost all of the people in the land were willing to
sacrifice anything for their freedom. The strong oppression of the
Syrians drove them to this sacrificial attitude.

After about 40 years of on and off civil war, the Jews became tired of
the bloodshed, and popular opinion tended toward peace. In this case,
peace meant compromise, and compromise was the game of the Sadducees.
John Hyrcanus, of the Maccabees, was really very close to the Sadducee
way of thinking.

However, the compromising policy of Hyrcanus became unpopular in a few
years, and so the Pharisees came into power. Due to the double tyranny
of the Pharisees and king Herod, the Sadducees had made a great comeback
not long before the birth of Christ. Let’s face it: the Pharisees were
no fun at all.

The religious beliefs of the Sadducees can be summed up in a single
thought: they were always opposed to what the Pharisees believed. They
believed that only the written Law is binding, whereas the Pharisees
believed that the body of tradition and written interpretation were just
as important as the Law itself.

The Sadducees punished breaches of the Law severely, but the Pharisees
often interpreted their way around the written Law, and thus got out of
the proscribed punishment.

They had a strong belief in human free will, while the Pharisees
believed in predestination to the point of being fatalistic.

They denied the resurrection, and any kind of continued existence of the
soul after physical death. This led to their inordinate value of private
property and possessions. The Pharisees, however, believed that the soul
continued after death, and that there would be a severe judgement in
eternity.

The Sadducees did not believe in angelic beings, or demons, and any
reference to such in Scripture was converted to a manifestation of God
Himself. The Pharisees did believe in angels.

The Sadducees always reserved the right of private opinion about
Scripture and the Law, while the Pharisees rejected that right,
tyrannically imposing their opinions on all.

The Sadducees were a mixture of both the conservative and the liberal
from today’s American society. The pressures of history and their
religious beliefs worked together to make them what they were. Although
they had some good elements to their philosophy, they were just as
spiritually and morally bankrupt as the Pharisees. They are a good
example of wrong reaction for the right reason. It was a good thing to
be opposed to the religious tyranny of the Pharisees, but the motives of
the Sadducees were wrong, and thus their beliefs went in the wrong
direction. Although religion was important to them, relationship with
God was not, and so they destroyed themselves. They left the pages of
history forever after the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 A.D.

### THE ESSENES

The Essenes were a widespread movement in the ancient world. They
appeared on the scene not long before the Maccabaean revolt, about 175
B.C.

Their decision was to withdraw from the evils of the world around them,
and they were the prototype of the monastic movement of the dark and
middle ages. Because of the destruction of the Jewish nation, and their
deportation to points all over the ancient world, this movement was
widespread.

These are the people who produced the Dead Sea Scrolls, and who lived in
the caves of Qumran where the Dead Sea Scrolls were found. In a sense,
these were the ostriches of the time, sticking their heads in the sand,
and hoping that others would leave them alone.

They were widely admired, especially by the intelligentsia of the day.
Both Josephus and Philo are full of praise for them (but notice that
neither wanted to be one).

Their group was strictly organized, and enforced strict obedience to
their leadership. They had a system of double initiation. First, they
had to undergo a probation period of one year, and after this time they
would undergo an initiation ceremony of ritual purification.

After two more years of probation they gained their full membership in
the community. At this time an oath was taken in which the new member
would swear himself to complete truthfulness to other members of the
community, and complete secrecy on the doctrines of the community to
those outside (this is one reason why Christ forbade swearing).

Only adults were admitted into the Essene order, but they did have a
children’s’ recruiting and introduction program.

The Essene community was dedicated to total communism. They had a common
purse. They had common clothes. They had common food at a common table.

Trading of any kind was prohibited. They had a strictly regulated daily
labor plan.

They were total pacifists. They were not even allowed to make weapons or
anything that might hurt someone.

They observed the sabbath with strict adherence. The read and explained
Scripture in their daily worship schedule.

They were extremely ascetic in many ways. They abstained from sex and
marriage; their ranks were only increased through outside recruiting. It
is a testimony to their popularity that they have continued in one form
or another until even today.

They were prohibited from profanity, makeup (or anything that might
enhance their physical appearance), bathed only in cold water, wore only
white, and were greatly modest about all bodily functions.

They substituted their own ritual system for God’s, and they thought
their own to be superior. They did not sacrifice any animals.

The Essene movement was a reaction to the incursions of the evil outside
world. They were not much different from the other utopian movements of
history. They depended very much on strong and virtuous leadership, and
when their leadership failed them, they disappeared from the pages of
history.

Unlike their Pharisee and Sadducee counterparts, they seemed to have a
more vital, daily relationship with God. However, distortions were
inevitable due to their rejection of God’s ritual system, and some of
them even went so far as to engage in sun worship. They were most like
the Pharisees, and could even be considered a radical Pharisee sect.

They were the pattern which the early church (mistakenly) patterned
themselves. Since they lived such sequestered lives, Christ would have
little to say about them, because He never ran across them.

John the Baptist was considered to be like the Essenes because of his
ascetic life in the desert, but he really wasn’t.

### THE ZEALOTS

The Zealots were almost purely a political party. They called for the
violent overthrow of the Roman rule. They carried on the tradition of
the Maccabees they were militant, and full of zeal and purpose. They
were the cause of the Jewish wars and the destruction of Jerusalem.

They fought with complete fanaticism to the very end. They were
extremely patriotic, but not many were Godly. They took their patriotism
to great excess, and vowed to strike down all the enemies of Israel.
Although they were politically correct (not in the modern sense), they
were morally wrong, and in this they were most similar to the southern
U.S. in the early 1800’s.

### Transition

The nation of Israel at the time of the birth of Christ was an unhappy
nation. For hundreds of years, they had battled for their freedom and
lost. They had been under the crushing rule of foreign nations.

For hundreds of years, a great destiny had been before them, taunting
them. Because of this, they chafed under the yoke of Roman rule through
Herod.

Without a national relationship with God, the nation could not be free.
Without a national relationship with God, the nation could not enjoy the
blessings of the unconditional covenants.

Without a national relationship with God, they would reject the greatest
of all world leaders of all time: Jesus Christ. One and all, they would
reject Him.

### Introduction to the Spiritual Perspective

The past history of any people has an impact on their present culture
the way they think, solve problems, react to pressure or prosperity.
Israel at the time of Christ was no different. The people stood at the
crossroads of their own national history. They had a past, and they
could make choices which decided their future.

History is made up of many elements: geography, culture, philosophy &
religion, economics, technology, politics, and many others.

The greatest of all the elements is the principle that Jesus Christ
controls history. The attitude of a nation toward Christ has a great
impact on its place in history. The attitude of the nation toward
establishment truth has a great impact on that nation’s status before
God. The attitude of the individual believer toward Bible Truth has a
great impact on all other people in the nation.

### The Cosmic System

The term “cosmic system” refers to Satan’s plan and process for
controlling the world, and his attempt, using his organization of fallen
angels, to counteract the plan of God in all respects. In his plans and
programs, Satan will ultimately and certainly fail. Jesus Christ is the
victor in the spiritual warfare, the “angelic conflict”. The Lord Jesus
sits at the right hand of God the Father in heaven, where all His
enemies shall be made his footstool.

The cosmic system has a great impact on the history of a nation. History
has certain downward trends which signify the cosmic influence on a
nation. For example, Israel at the time of the birth of Christ had been
on the downward side of history for quite some time. It is important to
take a look at the principles of the cosmic system related to history in
order to fully understand the period in question.

### General Principles of the Cosmic System.

Human history is the resolution of the prehistoric angelic conflict. In
order to vindicate himself and His judgment of the fallen angels, God
conceived a plan by which sinful human beings could glorify Him.

In order to justify his rejection of the prehistoric grace offer from
God, Satan conceived a system designed to counteract the plan of God.

Therefore, the purpose of the Satan’s cosmic system is as follows:

-   To keep unbelievers from believing in Jesus Christ.

-   To destroy the believer’s relationship with God.

-   To bring in his own millennium through internationalism and a
    centralized world government.

-   To prevent God’s millennium from arriving.

There are three plans in Satan’s cosmic system.

-   The World Plan

-   The Individual Plan

-   The Propaganda Plan

### The World Plan of Satan

The world plan is Satan’s plan to bring in His own millennium, and to
prevent God from bringing in the Divine Millennium. The world plan is a
highly organized international conspiracy of demons.

**Eph 6:12**, “For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but
against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers
of this darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly
realms.”

Although the world plan is highly organized through the genius of Satan
Himself, the human side is not so. Demons do control human beings
through demon possession and demon influence, but the humans themselves
are rarely well informed. Often a world conspiracy theory will arise,
but these are due to the demonic side and not the human side. There is
no Biblical documentation for a human world conspiracy. Humans are
simply pawns in Satan’s world plan.

### The Individual Plan of Satan

The individual plan is an integral part of the world plan, since human
participation in the demonic organization is absolutely essential. The
means to the end of the cosmic system is power.

The world branch is constantly grasping for power over the human race
and its organizations. Power in the form of human government is of the
utmost importance in the world branch of the cosmic system. The more
power that the enemy has, the greater he thinks he can be. The more
power the enemy has, the more effectively he can carry out his plan.

In every human life and human organization, Satan is grasping for more
power, so he can wield it to carry out his plan. Every time that someone
or some organization depends on a human viewpoint solution, Satan gains
power over their lives. Every time that someone or some organization
comes to believe a cosmic counterfeit or lie, Satan gains power over
their lives.

### The Satanic “Millennium”

As a part of the angelic appeal trial of human history, Satan has
developed his idea of a millennium, which is designed to prove his
point. In order to bring in his millennium, Satan must have total
control of international human authority. This is why there is so much
influence towards internationalism in the world.

God ordained nationalism after Satan’s first attempt at internationalism
at the tower of Babel, Gen. 11:19.

Satan will bring in his “millennium”, known as the Period of Great
Tribulation, which will only come after the rapture of the church. The
Satanic millennium can only be put into place when there are no
believers on planet earth.

This ‘millennium’ will be the most chaotic, disastrous, and miserable 7
years in world history. It is the tribulation of the book of revelation.

The intent of the Satanic millennium.

-   To prove that the prehistoric sentence of God which condemned the
    fallen angels to eternity in the lake of fire was unfair.

-   To prove that Satan is God’s equal, Isa 14:14, “I will ascend above
    the tops of the clouds; I will make myself like the Most High.”"

The characteristics of the Satanic millennium.

-   Counterfeit righteousness and injustice under the veil of justice.

-   Constant change and lack of dependability

-   Treacherous motives and cruel slavery behind the mask of mercy.

-   Wrong approaches to problem solving and false solutions which always
    make the problem worse.

-   Chaos and confusion.

-   Bad decisions from a position of weakness and a society saturated
    with evil.

-   Dishonesty, obfuscation, evasiveness, and a lack of veracity. (All
    this sounds like U.S. politics today).

### The Fight Against the Divine Millennium.

Satan is constantly fighting against the Divine plan for human history.
Satan thinks that if he can destroy or delay the Divine millennium, he
will somehow gain an advantage in the angelic conflict. He is wrong. He
does not have the power to do either.

The Divine Millennium will come at the second advent of Christ, and it
therefore immediately follows the tribulation. There have been two
attacks in history against the Divine Millennium: the attack against
Christ, and the attack against the Jews. These attacks are tantamount to
murdering the witnesses of a trial, so that they cannot testify.

### The Attacks against Christ.

Jesus Christ will be the world ruler during the Divine Millennium, and
His rulership will be fantastic.

There was an attempt to destroy the mediatorship of Christ.

-   In Genesis 6 there is a record of an attempt to destroy the human
    genetic purity of the line of Christ.

-   In order to be the perfect mediator between God and man, Christ had
    to be both fully God and fully man in the hypostatic union.

-   Satan attempted to destroy the human side of this equation.

-   Demons seduced human women and impregnated them. Their children were
    angelic-human half breeds, and no longer genetically pure.

-   Only Noah and his family resisted this demonic conspiracy. This is
    why the rest of the earth had to be destroyed.

-   God considered this attack so great, that he imprisoned the angels
    who participated under the surface of the earth, where they still
    reside, waiting for their release in the tribulation.

There were attempts to kill Christ before He could fulfill the purpose
of His life.

Satan knew that if he could kill Christ before His time, the plan of God
would be stymied. Therefore, there were several attempts on His life.

-   The attempt of Herod, Mat 2:13,16, “When they had gone, an angel of
    the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream.”Get up," he said, “take the
    child and his mother and escape to Egypt. Stay there until I tell
    you, for Herod is going to search for the child to kill him.” “When
    Herod realized that he had been outwitted by the Magi, he was
    furious, and he gave orders to kill all the boys in Bethlehem and
    its vicinity who were two years old and under, in accordance with
    the time he had learned from the Magi.”

-   The attempts of the Pharisees, **Mat 12:14**, “But the Pharisees
    went out and plotted how they might kill Jesus.”

-   The attempts of the chief priest and elders, **Mat 26:3,4**, “Then
    the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the
    palace of the high priest, whose name was Caiaphas, and they plotted
    to arrest Jesus in some sly way and kill him.”

Of course, all of these attempts failed completely.

### The Attacks against the Jews

The Jews are God’s chosen people, and they are going to be Christ’s
subjects in the Divine Millennium. Therefore, Satan is constantly
plotting against the Jews in his attempt to exterminate them as a race
of people. There is a tremendous amount of Satanic propaganda against
the Jews. The Jewish world conspiracies, etc.

In every generation, there is an attempt through the Satanic world
conspiracy to eliminate the Jews as a race. In the 20th century, there
have been at least three attempts at genocide against the Jews.

-   In Soviet Russia, from 1917 to the present.

-   In Nazi Germany, from 19331945.

-   By various Arab nations, today.

During the tribulation, the genocidal attacks against the Jews will
reach their crescendo.

We are to judge the present nation of Israel by the standards of Divine
establishment.

We are to judge individual Jews only when they come under our authority
or they break the law.

In all other instances, we are to give Jews maximum respect and
reservation of judgment.

As a national entity, we are to provide a haven for the Jews, so that
they might be free from racial prejudice.

### Conclusion.

Although these demonically inspired attacks are terrible in their
intensity and genius, they have no chance of succeeding. God will
protect the Jews until the return of Jesus Christ. He will succeed,
easily.

### The Propaganda Plan of Satan

The purpose of the propaganda plan is to promote the cosmic counterfeits
and lies, and to attack the word of God. The propaganda plan integrates
and cooperates with both the individual and the world branches of the
cosmic system. The propaganda branch is an expression of Satanic genius
and the demonic organization. Human beings are an important element in
the propaganda branch.

### The Promotion of the Cosmic Counterfeits and Lies.

The cosmic system has an elaborate scheme of counterfeits and lies.
These counterfeits and lies are designed to supplant the truth. The
counterfeits and lies match up with every category of truth possible,
including:

-   The Gospel.

-   The plan of God.

-   The power of God.

-   The person and work of God the Father

-   The person and work of Christ.

-   The person and work of the Holy Spirit.

These counterfeits and lies are promoted by every means possible. There
is a great emphasis today on the media, and especially television. Those
who are heavily involved in the cosmic system inevitably become cosmic
propagandists.

### The Attack Against the Word of God

In order to make the promotion of the cosmic counterfeits and lies fully
effective, the cosmic system attacks the Word. The attacks against the
Word come in two basic categories.

Attacks to destroy the Word outright. There have been many attempts
throughout history to destroy the manuscripts of the Bible.

Attacks to undermine the credibility of the Word. These are usually
attacks on the supernatural nature of the Divine inspiration of the
Word. Liberal theologians are mainly responsible for this branch of the
attack on the Word.

Rome at the Time of Christ
--------------------------

### The Roman Environment During the Life of Christ.

The Pax Romanus.

After many wars, the Roman Empire was established. After the death of
Julius Caesar, there was a civil war, and then Augustus Caesar
(Octavian) was given absolute power over the senate and people of Rome.
Augustus was a good man who desired peace and prosperity for Rome. After
many long years of warfare, external and internal, the people were tired
of it, and longed for peace. Augustus was sensitive and thoughtful, a
good ruler. Through his long rule many great things were provided.

Because of the state of peace, there was a great emphasis on trade and
commerce. Many Romans made their fortunes because of the advantages of
freedom through military victory and peace through military strength.
There were great building programs in every city, financed by donations
from the private sector. Theatres and temples and viaducts all sprouted
as if there were a spring season for buildings.

There was a fantastic system of roads and trade routes on the sea, all
protected by the police and the Roman equivalent of the coast guard.
Piracy and highway robbery remained at a minimum through capital
punishment.

Augustus also preached the virtues of morality and discipline and
justice and courage. He realized that the Roman empire was centered on
the family, and that its stability depended on it. There was a rigidly
pro-family bank of legislation, which encouraged marriage and children
inside the marriage relationship. Some of this was circumvented, while
much of it was taken to heart.

Augustus was Caesar at the time of the birth of Christ. Although
Augustus died in 14 A.D., Tiberius continued the Augustan tradition of
the Pax Romanum. Tiberius was the emperor for the remainder of the life
of Christ.

The Jews (and especially the Pharisees and Zealots) had absolutely
nothing to complain about. The peace of Rome was very pro-establishment.

### Koine’ Greek, the Language of the Roman Empire.

Koine’ Greek was the language of Alexander’s conquest. Attic Greek was a
difficult language to master. When Alexander expanded the Greek empire
as far as Afghanistan and India, the people had to assimilate in order
to be a part of that empire. Without Greek the foreigners could not
trade or prosper. However, since Attic Greek was so difficult, the
people of the empire commonized it, so that it could be easily used.

This commonization was a great simplification which retained the subtle
and detailed nature of its predecessor.

Koine’ Greek was the greatest language in history for written
communication. Through it many complex and subtle concepts could be
communicated with clarity. Koine’ Greek was retained in the Roman Empire
as the language of the common man. Nearly everyone knew it and used it
throughout their lives.

### Roman Culture

The Romans borrowed much of their culture from their Greeks. Greek
literature, drama, and games were all retained by the Romans. The Romans
admired almost all aspects of Greek culture, even the most debauched
things.

The Romans had spent much of their developing years in war and in a very
disciplined and workaholic environment, and so they lacked cultural self
esteem. The Greeks had much to offer in the way of culture although much
of theirs was corrupt. The Greeks had died from their cultural
debauchery it was the ruin of their empire.

No nation has ever survived the corruption of their morals. The
homosexuality of the Greeks was rampant; it destroyed them. The Romans
adopted even this even to the point of pederasty. It would also
destroyed them.

Analogous to this is the popularity of all things American to the
Japanese. Whether its baseball or disco or Madonna, the Japanese people
love it, as long as it is American. The contrast is that while Japan was
conquered by the U.S. and it adopted much of U.S. culture, the Greeks
were conquered by the Romans, and yet the Romans adopted the Greek
culture.

However, at the time of Christ, the Romans remained for the most part
moral and family oriented. It was the most stable time in the history of
the world.

The Roman postal service was for government use only a great idea.
Imagine the reduction in garbage from the elimination of junk mail.
Personal mail went with travelers and traders.

The Romans had no public schools. The education of their children was a
two-tiered system. The first tier was that of the disciplinary training.
This was usually administered by a well educated and trusted household
slave. He would teach manners and self-discipline to the children of the
household.

The second tier was that of the educational training. Science, math,
astronomy, medicine, botany, zoology, linguistics, literature, music,
and sports were all common subjects in the education of the child. There
was also a great emphasis on logic and rhetoric. 6. Next, there was the
institution of slavery.

It is important to note that the Romans could never imagine a state of
total abolition, so ingrained was the institution of slavery in their
nation and their culture and even their thinking. The moral question of
slavery was never raised.

Slaves became slaves because of the conquests of the Roman Empire.
Whenever a new territory was conquered, much of the population was
deported back to population centers elsewhere in the empire.

-   This served a twofold purpose: it provided cheap labor, and the
    insurance against guerrilla warfare in the conquered territory.

-   The people who were deported received a low form of welfare: they
    would have the basic logistics provided in exchange for their labor.
    Slavery did much to provide for those who would otherwise be charity
    cases.

The slaves of the Roman Empire took on what was considered the menial
tasks of the day much of the manual labor was done by them. As the
Empire grew and prospered, the more educated and presentable slaves
become household helpers and educators.

Slaves were always dependent on their masters, and as long as the Empire
stayed on the virtuous side.

-   Manumission was often granted to faithful slaves.

-   Emancipated slaves had great opportunities for upward mobility.

-   There was not an extreme prejudice against slaves often they were
    respected for who they were.

Although slaves were considered property, they were allowed to have
their own lives, marrying and producing families. The New Testament is
written from this frame of reference.

-   Masters are considered legitimate authority, as long as they stayed
    within the laws of Divine established. Therefore, slaves are called
    upon to obey their masters.

-   Masters are called upon to emancipate their slaves.

The Four Gospels
----------------

### General Introduction.

In the middle of the 6th decade of the first century, Christianity had
reached a crisis. Nero had begun his persecutions, and the Romans had
begun to suppress the open rebellion of the zealot Jews in Palestine.

The church had been well established throughout the Roman Empire, and
many doctrinal epistles had been written in support of the church.

Paul was in prison; many of the great believers of the eyewitness
generation had died from natural causes and violent persecution.

It appeared as though the prophecy of Christ about the destruction of
the Temple was about to come to pass due to the hopeless war in the Holy
Land.

It was because of these intense adversities that God the Holy Spirit
inspired three men in three different cities to write gospels records of
the life of Christ.

The three locations of writing were widely and evenly distributed.

Mark recorded Peter’s gospel in Rome.

Luke wrote his gospel somewhere in Greece, probably in Achaia.

Matthew wrote from Antioch in Syria.

These three gospels were written for various reasons.

Matthew wrote to Jews, in order to convince them of the Messiahship of
Jesus.

He hoped to convert them before the folly of the Zealot movement
resulted in their persecution and destruction.

Already war was begun in Palestine.

Luke wrote to Greeks in order to provide an accurate history of the
events of the incarnation. His second work, the book of Acts, is the
accurate history of the early church.

Mark wrote to record the life of Christ as told by Peter. It is likely
that Peter was in prison and close to martyrdom when he dictated the
story of Christ’s life. Peter no doubt thought it imperative that the
story get out. The abbreviated nature of the narrative reveals both
Peter’s nature and that he was in a hurry.

These three gospels, although very similar in their record of events,
arose from independent sources.

Peter told the story to Mark as he remembered it.

Luke had apparently interviewed a number of people over the years and
put these materials together to form his gospel.

Matthew had already written quite a lot of material in Aramaic, which
had to do with the prophecies concerning the life of Christ. He used
this material to form the basis for a number of his passages, and filled
in the rest from memory.

There was no written source on which these three are all based. The Q
hypothesis is pure bunk, thought up by arrogant German scholars who had
nothing better to do because they had rejected the inspired nature of
the Word.

These three gospels are often called the synoptic gospels, because they
have roughly the same record of events. Synoptic means to ‘see
together’.

These synoptic gospels were all written within a year or two from one
another. It is therefore doubtful that they could have relied on one
another. The times of writing are as follows (all dates approximate).

Mark 65 A.D.

Matthew and Luke 66 A.D.

Notice that in the time of crisis it was important from the Spirit’s
point of view to provide knowledge of the life of Christ! Remember, the
Spirit chose when to inspire these works. The gospel of John is very
similar in that it is inspired during a time of great adversity for the
church. John wrote his gospel in the eighties, most likely the late
eighties.

The problems of harmonizing the gospels

Critics of the gospels have been very skeptical about the accuracy of
the gospel accounts because even the synoptic gospels do not appear (at
least on the surface) to harmonize well.

However when the gospels are analyzed and then harmonized by those whose
work goes beyond just a surface appraisal, things work out quite well.
One such harmony is Dr. Thomas’ A Harmony of the Gospels, which was
written together with Dr. Gundry.

Dr. Thomas lists the following as problems with harmonization on page
302 of his book.

Accounts of Christ’s words sometimes differ. One evangelist’s report of
the same conversation, saying, or discourse may be more less complete
than another’s. Differences may occur in grammatical construction.
Synonyms may be substituted, verb voice or tense changed, or nouns
replaced by pronouns. There may be differences in the order of
discussion.

Sometimes the differences in details reported even involve what appear
to be contradictions.

Occasionally, the same or similar statements will be found in contexts
which appear to reflect different situations.

Somewhat similar events occur in different situations.

Sometimes what really appears to be the same event will be reported in a
different order in another gospel.

Sometimes diverse descriptive details are given for what appears to be
the same event; sometimes these details may have the appearance of
discrepancy.

The gospel writers do not always report the same events.

The big issue is this: Do these problems undermine the historical
integrity of the gospels? If they do, then they undermine the inspired
nature of the word.

In the last century, the German scholars saw these problems and failed
to account for them. Instead, they arrogantly denied the inspired nature
of the Word, and the ministers and the people followed. The result was
two world wars, both started by a nation full of people who called
themselves Christians. We stand on the brink of the same possibility in
our own nation.

Do not fear, however, for responsible scholarship more than accounts for
these problems without compromising the historical integrity and
inspired nature of these documents.

The general solutions are as follows:

Jesus spoke three languages: Greek, Hebrew, and Aramaic. The gospels
were all written in Greek. Therefore, by necessity many of the gospel
accounts of Jesus’ words are translations. In translation, there is
plenty of room of variance without losing meaning.

Sometimes the words are translated quite literally, but even so the use
of synonyms is quite acceptable. Sometimes the words are translated more
loosely in order to emphasize the impact of the words. This is also
perfectly acceptable.

In modern language we have many punctuation marks to indicate what is a
direct quote and what is not; what is a clarification by the author, and
what is a clarification by the original speaker; even footnotes are
employed to refer to source materials. None of these things were
available to the ancient writer.

Because of this it is difficult to tell when the writer is doing one of
these things in his translation of Jesus’ words (even if he is
translating). Suffice it to say that God the Holy Spirit is the
supernatural director of all translations of Jesus’ words, and He
ensured their accuracy.

When there are differences in translation, we can use them to amplify
all the translations.

Dr. Thomas summarizes this principle in this way:

> What one does expect to be reproduced in ordinary discussion are the striking
> or important statements, the leading thoughts, the major divisions or topics,
> and the general drift of discussion including transitions from one topic to
> another. While different reports are expected to agree on these matters, it is
> also expected that there will be differences on details such as changes of
> person, substitution of pronouns for nouns or vice versa, changes in tense,
> voice, or mood of the verbs, and substitution of synonyms are too trivial to
> be taken as serious objections to a reporter’s accuracy in ordinary
> discussion.

> While wording is important, meaning can be conveyed in a variety of ways.
> Verbal inspiration does not imply that truth can be accurately communicated in
> only one way. Rather, it means that the manner in which the Holy Spirit did
> speak through the human agents is inspired and hence accurate, word for word.

The people of the ancient world, especially the Jewish people, had highly
trained memories. They were often required to memorize long passages of the Old
Testament, and even in a language that was not their native tongue.

This, together with the ministry of the Holy Spirit led to tremendous accuracy
with reference to the meaning of the translation.

When a translation is direct from the Greek, we can expect greater accuracy in
the quotation of Jesus’ words, but even so, one writer for his own reason may
add or subtract from the quotation without a violation of the principle of
inspiration.

Also, Christ no doubt repeated many of His words over the course of His
ministry; this does not mean that He said the exact same thing every
time. Even during the same sermon it is likely that He repeated Himself.
One gospel writer may have recorded one part, while another different
parts with slightly different wording.

Differences in the details of what appear to be the same event may in
fact be a record of two quite different occurrences.

Sometimes, a writer will arrange his material according to subject and
therefore take things out of chronological order. This too is
acceptable, and does not corrupt the inspired nature of the text.

The conclusion is this: that harmonizing the gospels presents no major
problems with reference to inspiration. The accounts do harmonize well,
and the problems that go with a harmony are easily and rationally
accounted for.

### The Gospel of Matthew

For each gospel, we will follow this order:

Author

Circumstances of writing

Target readership

Purpose of writing, and

Characteristics of the gospel.

#### The Author

Matthew God used an outcast. His name is a transliteration of the
Aramaic word which means “gift of God.”

In his own Gospel, Matthew uses his regular name. In other gospels, the
name Levi is used. It is likely that Matthew became his name after his
conversion.

Matthew was a Jewish tax collector. It is likely that he was fairly well
off financially because of his profession. This makes his decision to
follow Christ all the more remarkable, because he left it all behind
Luke 5:28. It is likely that he worked at the toll house in Capernaum.

When he decided to follow our Lord, he threw a big party, and invited
all his friends. His decision to follow Christ was immediate.

As a tax collector, Matthew was an outcast in Jewish society. He
apparently had no friends who were devout in the Jewish faith for at his
party there were only other tax collectors and sinners.

The Roman tax collectors were hated by the Jews because the Roman taxes
were in addition to the Jewish taxes.

They were also hated because they represented the occupying forces of
the Roman Empire.

The tax collectors made their living by inflating the Roman taxes. They
essentially worked on commission.

Tax collectors were wealthy, but hated by their own society. They had to
live with a tremendous amount of prejudice.

Because of this prejudice their social options were severely limited.
They could only socialize with others who were outcasts.

It was easy for Matthew to follow Christ, considering his personal
circumstances. Social isolation does not make it easy to enjoy personal
wealth. No doubt he knew of the supernatural essence of Christ’s
ministry, and he may have even heard Him speak. It is often the outcast
that finds it easiest to follow Christ.

#### The Circumstances Surrounding the Writing of the Matthew

Of the circumstances of the writing of this gospel we know very little.
What little we can draw comes from inside the book.

The Target Readership for Matthew

The target readership for Matthew’s gospel was most likely Jewish
believers in Palestine. A secondary audience may be found in Jewish
audiences everywhere. His was the most read of all the gospels in the
first century. This popularity is a good testimony to its arrangement.

#### The Purpose of the Gospel of Matthew

The purpose of this gospel was generally to awaken and establish faith
in Jesus Christ.

That this gospel was written primarily with a Jewish audience in mind
brings a more specific purpose: To establish Christ as the Messiah and
to answer the attacks of Jewish critics on the issue of the person of
Christ.

It was also intended as a tool for use in evangelism for other
believers.

Finally, it was probably intended as a last ditch effort to stem the
tide of destruction which was descending upon the Jews in Palestine.

The Jews were their own worst enemies. They were extremely
self-destructive, and especially so since their rejection of Christ as
Messiah.

Their self-destructive tendencies culminated in a great number of them
choosing the way of the zealot armed resistance without virtue.

The way of the zealot could only result in the destruction of the Jews
in the land, and of Jerusalem. The Romans’ method of warfare was far
superior to that of the zealots. Anyone with common sense could see the
inevitable destruction of the Jewish armies.

Therefore, Matthew wrote his gospel as a last ditch effort to stem the
tide of destruction that had welled up among the Jews in Palestine.

Matthew wrote just as the zealots began their armed revolt in 66 A.D.

#### General Characteristics of Matthew

The most striking of the characteristics of this gospel is its emphasis
on Christ as the Messianic King promised by the Old Testament prophets.
Time and again Matthew points out some event in Christ’s life, or one of
His characteristics as being a fulfillment of a prophecy. He especially
concentrates on Christ as the fulfillment of the Davidic covenant.

Matthew also concentrates on the kingdom of the Messianic king. He uses
the term, “the kingdom of heaven” 32 times, but it is not mentioned
elsewhere in Scripture. He stresses both the spiritual and political
aspects of the kingdom. Matthew records ten parables about the kingdom
which are found in none of the other gospels. His is the gospel of the
New Covenant for Israel.

Matthew’s gospel has a very Jewish flavor, yet at the same time he often
takes the opportunity to denounce the Pharisees and their incorrect
practices and perceptions of the Messiah. The latter is probably due to
Matthew’s social isolation. No doubt he was often victimized by the
Pharisees for being a tax collector. Like so many who are the victims of
prejudice, Matthew has special insight into those who perpetuate such
sins.

However, Matthew does not exclude the Gentiles. Matthew was emotionally
a Gentile because of his social isolation. He makes sure his readers
understand that once the Jews have completely rejected Christ, the
kingdom would be transferred to the Gentiles.

Matthew is the one who arranges his material by subject, and aside from
the passion week he does not follow the chronological order of events.
Matthew, more than any other gospel writer, has an ax to grind. It is a
righteous ax, and so he arranges his material to suit the grinding.

In spite of Matthew’s choice of arrangement, his gospel retains a great
unity and order. This reveals the mind of a tax collector. The order of
numbers and accounts lead naturally to literary order. There is great
continuity in the order of the subjects, and excellent literary
transition.

### The Gospel of Mark

#### The Author(s) Mark and Peter.

There are really two persons behind the writing of this gospel. The one
who gave dictation, Peter, and the one who received it, Mark.

The following is an extraordinary statement: Mark was there when both
Paul and Peter died. It is extraordinary because Mark began life as a
coward, and was for while in great disfavor among the other disciples.
This is a testimony to the grace of God.

Mark was Jewish, and grew up in Jerusalem. No doubt he was aware of the
person of Christ and the events of His life. There is even some
speculation that he was the young man of Mark 14:5152. The actions of
that young man are certainly commensurate with his character flaw of
cowardice which he expressed about 20 years later.

His mother’s name was Mary, and he was a relative of Barnabas. When Paul
and Barnabas took Mark along on the first journey, he left for home
before their ascent of the Taurus mountain range on their way to the
interior of Asia Minor, Acts 13:5.

This desertion set Paul’s heart against Mark. When Barnabas and Paul
decided on a later missionary journey, Paul refused to take Mark along
on the basis of his former desertion, Acts 15:3639. In fact, Paul and
Barnabas had a sharp disagreement over the issue, and they parted ways
at that point. Barnabas believed in Mark.

Whatever transpired in the next 10 or 15 years (AD 49 to AD 62), Mark
had won himself over to Paul. During Paul’s first imprisonment, Mark was
there with him, Col. 4:10; Philem 24. In Philemon (62 AD) Paul calls
Mark a fellow worker. In Colossians, Paul reminds the Colossians to
welcome Mark if he comes that way. Paul is restoring Mark’s reputation
to others.

Mark was with Peter in Rome (called Babylon by Peter) 1 Pet. 5:13, and
sent his greeting along with Peter’s letter. Peter affectionately calls
Mark his son.

Mark apparently left Rome shortly after Peter’s first epistle (@65 AD),
because when Paul is imprisoned a second time at Rome, he calls for
Mark, who is with Timothy at Ephesus, 2 Tim. 4:11. Paul calls Mark ‘well
useful for service’. He considers Mark the deacon type, and finds great
favor with him in this role. The word for well useful is euchrestos, a
very positive and complimentary word.

If Mark obeyed Paul’s command, and it is likely he did, then he was
present when Paul was executed.

If Mark was there for Paul’s execution, then it is equally likely that
he was there for Peter’s, because they were both martyred at about the
same time, and both in Rome.

Mark watched the deaths of these two great believers. He faced death
with courage this time, a changed man because of the truth residing in
his soul. This is the man who ran at the arrest of Jesus, and who ran in
the face of the unknown at the base of the Taurus mountains. Mark was a
man who feared, and yet by the grace of God who grew, and then endured.
It is extraordinary that he is the one chosen by God the Holy Spirit to
put down in writing the gospel as told by Peter, probably just before or
just after Peter’s death.

Remember Mark next time that you fail! And remember him the next time
that you are ready to write someone off!

Peter Peter’s name was also Simon. The testimony of Peter always stands
behind the writing of Mark in this epistle.

If there is one character trait of Peter which rises above all others,
it is his emotionalism. Peter often let his emotions rule his thinking,
much to his detriment and regret.

Peter is enthusiastic, emotional, swift to speak without thinking, full
of love and anger, sometimes legalistic and snobbish, and Jewish in a
prejudicial way. He is one of the independent, rebellious Galileans. He
loves Christ so much, yet he cannot muster the spiritual resources to
remain with Him in His arrest, trial, and death.

He is the second to the tomb on the third day, and enters first. He is
the first of the disciples to see Christ after the resurrection. He is
unsure of his standing with Christ immediately after the resurrection.
Peter is a leader and very much a preacher, though not careful about
what he says. He makes mistakes, he broods, and then he seeks and needs
forgiveness in a desperate emotional way. In the end, he writes two
epistles about suffering, and speaks his remembrances of Christ in a
brief, but humble manner.

The gospel includes those incidents which place Peter in an unflattering
light. In these he is brutally honest about his mistakes.

It excludes those incidents which place Peter in a flattering light.

Peter is an early leader in the church, but fades from the limelight in
about 50 AD Nothing is heard from him until he writes his epistles in
the early 60’s, and then dictates his gospel story to Mark in the
mid60’s.

Probably the best analogy to Peter’s early character is a politician on
the campaign trail. Always promising, always in the limelight, but never
following through.

#### Circumstances Surrounding the Writing of Mark

The place is Rome, the situation the persecutions of Nero. Paul and
Peter are in prison, soon to die at the command of Nero himself.

Mark is there with them. Peter is anxious to tell the story of Christ
before he dies, and he does so, dictating to Mark.

It is not clear whether Mark actually composed this gospel before or
after Peter’s death. It is not important. This was a really hard time
for believers in Jesus Christ, and especially so in Rome.

#### The Intended Readers of Mark’s Gospel.

It is most likely that Peter (and Mark) had a Gentile audience in mind.
This is especially interesting since Peter began with a prejudice
against the Gentiles, and one which was difficult for him to leave
behind. It apparently took him more than 20 years to do so. His gospel
is devoid of anything that would be offensive to a Gentile, and it does
not presuppose an extensive knowledge of the Old Testament.

Also, the Roman audience would have taken priority, since it was the
closest.

#### The purpose of the Gospel of Mark

Mark was written to win converts to Christianity. Mark portrays Christ
as a suffering servant. This image fits well the Christians in Rome, and
so the Romans would have been well acquainted with it.

To encourage those in Rome who were enduring persecution. Peter always
had a heart for those who were suffering. He mentions the persecution of
Christ often to encourage those who endured similar sufferings.

The greatest testimony and greatest encouragement for those who suffer
is that of Christ.

The greatest testimony for those who are in unbelief is the suffering of
Christ.

Remember, this gospel goes out to the very hotbed of the Neronian
persecution. It is a voice that rises above the cacophony of persecution
and says, “but it is true”.

#### Characteristics of Mark’s Gospel

Brevity it is easily the shortest of the gospels, and conspicuous among
the missing are the nativity, the genealogy, and most of Christ’s longer
discourses.

Action Peter tells the story as he lived his own life. The story moves
at a very fast pace, and its transitions force the narrative into a
bangup story. The crowds are always pressing, the demons always
attacking, miracles constantly being performed. Peter includes action
and excludes doctrine. Mark has been called the camera man of the gospel
writers for his vivid portrayal of the life of Christ.

Believability the story is told in simple and even rough language.
Peter’s Greek lacks perfection, but it gives the gospel a nice ‘I was
there’ touch that makes it quite vivid and easy to believe. Many minor
details are included about Christ and His person. Even the bad things
are left in the story.

Centered on Christ as the Son of God and as the servant of man. This
would have been a good combination for his Gentile audience. The
distinction of servanthood would have been especially appropriate since
their Gods were ones who demanded service instead of those who would
give it. The contrast would be striking.

Chronological Apparently, Mark’s gospel follows closely the actual
chronological order of events in the life of Christ.

### The Gospel of Luke.

#### The Author Luke

God used a Gentile doctor. Luke is mentioned only three times in all of
the New Testament, yet he is responsible for 28% of it, for he wrote
both his gospel and the book of Acts.

Luke is the only Gentile writer of the New Testament, and probably the
only second generation Christian writer. He was not present at the
incarnation.

Luke is most likely Greek. He is an excellent writer and historian. In
fact, he is the greatest of the historians of antiquity. He is
objective, detailed, and well informed. He writes clearly and keeps
things very well ordered.

Paul calls Luke the beloved physician in Colossians 4:14.

Although there were many charlatans in the ancient world, there were
also a number of good and skilled physicians.

Medicine did not go much beyond advanced first aid in the ancient world,
but such a service was very valuable.

Luke was probably behind Paul’s advice for Timothy to take a little wine
for his stomach.

At one point, Luke was the only one with Paul during his imprisonment, 2
Tim 4:11.

Luke would have been a valuable addition to a missionary team,
considering the hazards of travel in the ancient world. Considering the
number of times that Christians were beaten, stoned, or otherwise
injured because of their faith, Luke got to practice his profession
often.

Luke was not only the team physician, but he was often active in the
evangelistic efforts, Acts 16:13. That Luke was a Gentile meant that he
would have been valuable in ministering to other Gentiles. Remember,
most of the missionary teams were Jewish, and Paul’s ministry at first
concentrated on teaching at synagogues.

#### Circumstances and Target Readership.

Luke wrote in about 6667 AD He wrote his gospel, and later the Acts of
the Apostles, to a man by the name of Theophilus. He probably wrote from
somewhere in Greece, maybe even Athens. Little else is known about the
circumstances of writing.

Luke addresses Theophilus as “most excellent”. This title was often used
of those who were in prominent social or political positions. Theophilus
was likely such a man. By accepting a book dedicated to him, Theophilus
would have followed the ancient tradition of taking responsibility for
its publication. We owe our thanks to Theophilus for the preservation of
this great gospel.

Luke wanted to produce a gospel for Gentile readers, and it is easy on
the Hebraisms and explains Jewish customs and localities. He usually
quotes the Old Testament when it is contained in a saying of Christ, but
not otherwise. There is little emphasis on the fulfillment of prophecy.

#### Purpose of the Gospel of Luke

Luke comes right out and says it in chapter 1:4: “so that you might know
the exact truth about the things you have been taught.”

It is Luke’s intent to be precise, and to more fully explain the
subjects of which he has already spoken.

Verses 13 in the first chapter reveal Luke’s motive and method:
“Inasmuch as many have undertaken to compile an account of the things
accomplished among us, just as those who from the beginning were
eyewitnesses and servants of the word have handed them down to us, it
seemed fitting for me as well, having investigated everything carefully
from the beginning, to write it our for you in consecutive order, most
excellent Theophilus,”

Luke wrote for Theophilus, but with the intent that Theophilus would
publish this work, and pass it along to many others. Luke’s purpose is
broad in its scope.

It is apparent that there were many falsehoods and distortions going
around about the person and life of Christ. Luke wants to set the record
strait with an exact narrative of the events.

Of course, by getting the record straight, Luke’s desire is for
evangelism. He wants people to know the truth, and to identify Christ as
their savior. Luke has a great emphasis on the cross, and the end of the
life of Christ. This reveals his designs for evangelism.

#### Characteristics of Luke’s Gospel

Luke’s gospel is much more comprehensive than the others. It begins many
months before the other synoptic gospels, and it ends after the
ascension. Many details are included here which are not in the others.
Luke is a diligent and thorough historian.

Luke concentrates on praise and worship more so than the other gospels.
He records the four great nativity songs Mary’s, Zacharias’, that of the
angels, and Simeon’s.

Luke emphasizes the humanity of Christ, and the perfection of that
humanity.

Luke stresses that Christ makes salvation available to all men, and not
just to Jews. He clearly shows the impact of Christ on the lives of many
men, women, and children. Both the rich and poor, the Jew, the
Samaritan, and the Gentile are included. Luke often shows this impact as
occurring right inside people’s homes.

Luke records seven prayers of Jesus Christ which are not mentioned
elsewhere.

Luke is literary. He has a remarkably large vocabulary, and uses many
different writing styles to fit the situation at hand. His is the best
written of the gospels from a literary standpoint. There are 800 words
in Luke and Acts which do not occur elsewhere in the New Testament.

Luke is detailed, but not to the point of boring his readers to death.
He has a knack for including what is pertinent to the narrative, and
leaving behind what is extraneous. Perhaps the powers of observation and
diagnosis he developed as a doctor come into play in this regard.

Luke concentrates on the death of Christ. From chapter 9 forward he
keeps the thread of Christ’s death in the fabric of his narrative.

### The Gospel of John

#### The Author John

God used a zealot. He was a cousin “according to the flesh” of Jesus
Christ. Brother of James (not the epistle writer). A native of Galilee.
John’s mother Salome was a follower of Jesus, and ministered to Him of
her own means.

John was a fisherman of the Sea of Galilee, his life was hard work, but
apparently it had paid off for his family, because they had servants,
and were able to support the ministry of Jesus Christ. Galilee was a
region somewhat analogous to the U.S. South not too long ago. It is
conservative to a fault, and more than a little rebellious in character.
The fires of rebellion flamed openly in this region. In reality a lot of
senseless violence took place in the name of the zealot movement, but
there was very little virtue. This time was somewhat analogous to that
of Northern Ireland today.

John had great humility. When John the Baptist points out Jesus as the
Messiah, John follows without delay. He never mentions own name in own
Gospel.

He was nicknamed, with brother James as the “Sons of Thunder”, a
reference to their manner in Word and Deed, Mk 3:17. It is likely that
they had a fair amount of Zealot ideals in their heads.

He was outspoken about his faith from the start. He was “The disciple
whom Jesus loved” was the closest to Jesus of the inner circle of Peter,
James, and John.

He was the only eyewitness to the cross among the disciples, and he was
eyewitness to the resurrection, Jn 20.

He was one of the “Pillars of the Church”, Gal 2:9. Paul had a high
regard for him. He took over as chief of Apostles some time in the late
70’s.

His writing reflects the 50+ years of careful thought about the life of
Christ and the Christian life.

Under his ministry, Ephesus became the center of the pivot which gave
the Roman Empire its greatest time of prosperity under the Antonine
Caesars, 98180 AD

He used very basic Greek grammar to express incredibly deep theological
ideas.

He was the key figure in the transition from the pre-canon period to the
post canon period.

#### Circumstances of Writing the Gospel.

John wrote about 20 years after the completion of the synoptic gospels.

The synoptic gospels were written during the Neronian persecutions;
John’s gospel is written in the aftermath. The Neronian persecution set
the attitude in the Roman Empire. The average Roman at least publicly
viewed Christianity and Christians with disdain.

This unpopularity was worse for Christianity than the original
persecution. Peer pressure was more effective in weakening Christianity
than capital punishment. Martyrs make good PR figures.

At the time of writing, Christianity was much weaker than it had been
some twenty years before.

John probably wrote from Ephesus, the place of his later ministry. He
had formerly ministered in Jerusalem, but was apparently driven out by
Jewish persecution.

John was the last eyewitness to the life of Christ, and he has a desire
to retell the story in his own words.

John wrote in a time of transition to the post-canon era of the church
age. The temporary spiritual gifts, with all their fantastic abilities,
are being left behind.

#### The Target Audience

If John’s Epistles are any indication of the readers of his gospel, he
wrote to a crowd that needed to understand the basics of Christianity.

The Christian church had fallen into great disrepair in just twenty
years’ time. The average Christian did not understand even how to
confess his or her sins.

The suffering of the Neronian persecution, and the relentless peer
pressure of the pagan Roman citizens had led many believers to seek
alternate philosophies which bore the name of Christianity, but which
were anything but.

John has an very tough uphill battle to fight with regard to heresy and
the truth. The situation was not unlike what we encounter in our nation
today.

#### The Purpose of the Gospel

In John 20:3031, John communicates his purpose: “Many other signs
therefore did Jesus in the presence of the disciples, which are not
written in this book: but these are written, that you may believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing you may have
life in his name.”

John wants his readers to believe if they are unbelievers, and to grow
to maturity if they are believers.

In order to do so, he attempts to establish Jesus as the Son of God and
the Messiah (Christ), and reestablish the Word of God as the authority
and the Truth.

#### The Characteristics of the Gospel.

The gospel is very simple in the use of the Greek language and writing
style.

John writes about some extremely profound concepts, and he uses many
symbols to do so.

John records at least six miracles which are recorded nowhere else in
the gospels. He always designates these as signs.

John’s gospel concentrates on events which are not recorded elsewhere.
He records Christ’s early Galilean ministry, and his upper room
discourse.

John concentrates on the words of Christ Himself.

John develops in a fair amount of detail the relationship between the
Father and the Son.

John’s gospel is like a commentary he inserts his comments on the
narrative many times interpreting and illuminating the events as they
occur.

Jesus Christ in Eternity Past
-----------------------------

Christ in Eternity Past

**John 1:15**, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God, and the Word was God. He was in the beginning with God; all things
were made through him, and without him was not anything made that was
made. In him was life, and the life was the light of men. The light
shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome it.

In eternity past, the Father, Son, and Spirit were together trinity in
the perfection of love.

Then God decided to create man, and allow man to have free will. As He
looked down through history, He knew that man would use his free will to
sin to speak and think and do against the perfect character of God.

God decided to permit this sin, even though it would separate Him from
His creatures. He decided to do so because He had given His creatures
free will, and He desired to honor that free will, and take
responsibility for what He had created.

However, God could not compromise the perfection of His character in
order to continue His relationship with His creatures. Therefore, God
conceived a Plan whereby He could have a relationship with His creatures
without compromising His own Holy character, and that plan meant the
sacrifice of that which was most precious to Him of all: His unique and
only Son.

Therefore, God would become God-man, in order to save mankind. The God
man, Jesus Christ was unique in that He was fully man and fully God.

The Genealogy of Christ
-----------------------

### Introduction

Matthew and Luke have taken the time to record the genealogies of our
Lord. Since they wrote under the inspiration of God the Holy Spirit, we
can assume that this information is important.

Thanks to the Pharisees’ fascination with genealogies, at the time that
these men wrote there was a great archive of information on the subject,
and so they were able to accurately trace the line of Christ.

Luke traces the line of Christ through his mother, Mary. That is why
3:23 reads (or should read if it does not) “Jesus… being the son (as was
supposed of Joseph) of Eli…”

Women were seldom included in Jewish genealogies, and so Luke only had
the information about the patrilinear progenitors of Mary. He does start
with her, however, even though he does not mention her name.

Luke did take the time to write the complete story of Mary and the
immaculate conception, so he also took the time to write up her lineage.

Matthew traces of the line of Christ through Joseph, and thus back to
Abraham. Luke takes Mary’s line back to Adam.

Though Joseph was not Christ’s biological Father, our Lord traced his
legal heritage through him. That is why Matthew’s line stops at Abraham.
His line had to do with Israel, and Israel began with Abraham.

Since the line of Mary is Christ’s biological line, the line is traced
clear back to Adam.

Both of the genealogies skip generations.

This was a common practice in the Jewish handling of these things.

The reasons varied. It could be that the information was no longer
available, or that the genealogist considered a certain generation
unimportant. The reason does not matter. Just keep this fact in mind.

### Luke’s Genealogy.

Luke’s genealogy is unique in that it traces its line in the opposite
direction from the norm. However, we will start with Adam and go
forward, in spite of Luke’s deviant behavior.

#### Adam

It is fitting that we start with Adam, because Adam was the first head
of the human race. By looking at Adam’s life we can discover the
beginnings of our problems… and solutions. Adam is perhaps the one man
in these genealogies with the greatest connection to Christ.

**Rom 5:1221**, “Therefore, just as through one man sin entered into the
world, and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because all
sinned”

When God created Adam, He gave him the legitimate authority to rule
planet earth When God created Adam, He created him body, mind, and
spirit.

Adam’s human spirit formed the basis for his relationship with God in
the Garden.

Adam’s body gave him the basis for logistical provision in time and
space.

Adam’s mind gave him the basis for volitional decision and true worship
of God.

When Adam sinned, the following things happened.

He surrendered his authority to rule planet earth to Satan.

His human spirit was removed from his body, causing spiritual death. He
could not pass on this human spirit to future generations.

His body received an old sin nature, which would be genetically
transmitted to all future generations.

His mind became corrupted by the old sin nature, but still remained
functional. He still had a conscience, which contained a frame of
reference for right and wrong.

Therefore, all of Adam’s progeny would suffer the following
consequences:

They would be born spiritually dead, sharing the condemnation for Adam’s
sin.

They would be born with the indwelling presence of the old sin nature in
the cell structure of their bodies (and yes, genetics confirms this).

They would be born with a soul, and thus would be able to choose for
themselves the courses of their lives (and so genetics means very
little).

They would be born with a human conscience, and thus be able to discern
right from wrong,

**Romans 2:1415,** “For when Gentiles who do not have the Law do
instinctively the things of the Law, these, not having the law, are a
law to themselves, in that they show the work of the Law written in
their hearts, their conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts
alternately accusing or else defending them…”

**Romans 5:13,14**, “for until the Law sin was in the world; but sin is
not imputed though [concessive use of the present participle] there is
no law. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam until Moses, even over
those who had not sinned in the likeness of the offense of Adam, who is
a type of Him who was to come.”

The first part of this statement communicates the utter degeneracy of
the post sin, pre flood era, and their great hope in the last Adam.

The Law of Moses provided very much in the way of Divine Establishment
restraint on the old sin nature.

Without that restraint, the human race became extremely involved in the
cosmic system, even to the point of sexual relations with angels.

And yet even at that time, their personal sins were not imputed to them.
They were instead reserved for imputation to Jesus Christ

The second part of the statement has to do with the continued effects of
spiritual death.

Although their personal sins were not imputed to them, spiritual death
still continued unrestrained.

This shows the heart of the matter. Real spiritual death has to do with
the imputation of Adam’s sin. Salvation has to do with the imputation of
our personal sin into Adam.

We did not commit Adam’s sin Adam did. We do receive the imputation of
that sin at the moment of human birth.

**Romans 5:15,16** contrasts the two Adams:

“But the free gift is not like the transgression. For if by the
transgression of the one the many died, much more did the grace of God
and the gift by the grace of the one Man, Jesus Christ, abound to the
many. And the gift is not like that which came through the one who
sinned; for on the one hand the judgment arose from one transgression
resulting in condemnation, but on the other hand the free gift arose
from many transgressions resulting in justification.”

Adam’s original sin resulted in the spiritual death of the entire human
race, except for the second Adam, Jesus Christ.

The work of Christ on the cross in receiving the imputation of the
personal sins of the human race resulted in the opportunity for the
human race to regain spiritual life in God.

Salvation is a free gift, but it must be taken accepted. It is offered
to the entire human race without exception.

Salvation arose from the sins of all being imputed to the one.

Spiritual death arose from the sins of one being imputed to the all.

**Romans 5:17** tells us about realms of power and authority related to
sin.

“For if by the transgression of the one, death reigned through the one,
much more those who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of
righteousness will reign in life through the One, Jesus Christ.”

Adam’s sin put Satan into authority in the world and in the human body.
As a result the entire world was enslaved to Satan through the world
branch of the cosmic system.

The individuals of the world were enslaved to him through the individual
branch of the cosmic system; But Christ’s substitutionary spiritual
death gave the human race the authority to take their lives back.

The abundance of grace is a brief description of post salvation
spiritual assets.

The gift of righteousness is the imputation of the work of Christ into
the new believer at salvation.

Therefore even in the devil’s world we can rule our own lives through
God’s control.

**Romans 5:18** provides a further explanation of the principle.

“So then just as through one transgression there resulted condemnation
to all men, even so through one act of righteousness [a judicial
sentence, handed down by a judge] there resulted justification of life
to all men.”

The Greek word dikaio.ma indicates a judicial sentence passed down from
a judge.

In this case, it is the death sentence passed down from God the Father
to Jesus Christ. Christ died under the sentence of death for us.

The judicial decision is permanent and thus lasts for all eternity. God
will never rescind His judgment of our sins in Jesus Christ. We are
secure forever because of this.

This judicial sentence is also an act of righteousness for the perfect
Christ chose to die for sinful mankind.

Because of God’s judicial sentence and Christ’s righteous act provide
the basis for our justification.

The righteousness of Christ is then imputed to everyone who believes in
Christ.

This righteousness is used by God in order to justify our salvation. We
are qualified to live forever with Him.

**Romans 5:19** begins the summary,

“For as through the one man’s disobedience the many were made sinners,
even so through the obedience of the One the many will be made
righteous.”

Adam’s sin was imputed to all, and therefore all were made sinners.

Christ’s work of righteousness on the cross will provide righteousness
to all who believe on Him.

The final two verses of the chapter:

**Romans 5:19,20**, “Now the Law came in the side door [pareiserchomai]
so that the transgression [unbelief the unforgivable sin] might increase
[grow in importance as an issue]; but where the sin increased [as an
issue], grace abounded all the more [salvation provision] that, as the
sin reigned through [spiritual] death, even so grace might reign through
righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.”

The purpose of the Law is not to increase personal sin. Actually it
limits it.

The unforgivable sin, unbelief, is in view here. The unforgivable sin is
the rejection of Christ’s work on the cross.

Because of spiritual death, the imputation of Adam’s sin, the
unforgivable sin ruled and does rule over all those who refuse to
believe in Christ.

The Law increases the unforgivable sin as an issue, because the Law
defines both sin and the grace provision of God.

As sin increased as an issue, so also did grace, and the grace provision
of God.

Eternal life is the sum total of life after salvation for both time and
eternity.

We live eternal life if we take hold of our portfolio of post salvation
provision, and if we live eternal life, then we rule over all aspects of
the cosmic system.

Therefore, in Adam we all died. In Christ, we can all live. This is the
essence of the baptism of the Spirit.

**I Cor. 15:20-22** introduce the matter.

“But now Christ has been raised from the dead, the first fruits of those
who are asleep. For since by a man came death, by a man also came the
resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all
shall be made alive.”

This passage points out there is more to human life than life, and more
to physical death than death.

Physical death is only a tragedy if it occurs while one is also
spiritually dead. Human life is only meaningful insofar as it is
spiritual.

Adam’s sin resulted in the spiritual and physical death of all mankind.
Christ’s death resulted in the provision of salvation for all mankind.

Christ’s resurrection resulted in the provision of a resurrection body
for all believers. Christ was the first to be resurrected, but there
will be many more.

**1 Cor. 15:23 and 24** set forth the order of resurrections.

"But each in his own order: Christ the first fruits, after that those
who are Christ’s at His coming, then comes the end, when He delivers up
the kingdom to the God and Father, when he has abolished all rule and
all authority and power.

The word for order in this passage has to do with human organizations of
various kinds. Primarily, it is a word used of military formations. In a
military formation, things always happen in a certain order, and that is
what is in view here.

First, Christ is resurrected.

Second, all believers from the church age receive their resurrection
bodies.

Third, all believers from all other periods of history are resurrected.

It is at the end of history that all rule is abolished.

arche. is the word for rule, and it serves as the general category.

exousia and dunamis define the two types of rulership; exousia for
legitimate authority, and dunamis for illegitimate.

It is all abolished because the kingdom of heaven is put into place,
where Christ rules all.

The kingdom which Christ delivers is His millennial kingdom.

**I Cor. 15:25 and 26** explain the reason for the extension of Christ’s
millennial rule,

“For He must reign until He has put all His enemies under His feet. The
last enemy that will be abolished is death.”

Christ will reign in His kingdom until the job is completely finished.
He reigns from the right hand of the Father even now. He will reign on
planet Earth in the millennium.

In this case, reigning or ruling means more than just sitting on a
throne. It means an active and benevolent rule towards all who are His
rightful subjects. All who believe in Him remain just that His rightful
subjects.

There are many enemies of Jesus Christ: humans and angels and even
death.

Death will be the last of these enemies to fall to the power and
authority of Jesus Christ.

Death was brought into the world by Adam, though Satan was Christ’s
first real enemy.

**1 Cor. 15:27 and 28** comment on the victory that has already been
won.

“For he has put all things in subjection under His feet. But when he
says, ‘All things are put in subjection,’ it is evident that He is
excepted who put all things in subjection to Him. And when all things
are subjected to Him, then the Son Himself also will be subjected to the
One who subjected all things to Him, that God may be all in all.”

God the Father has placed all things under the rulership of Christ
positionally. The cross and the resurrection were the dual strategic
victories that absolutely assured the overall victory of God in the
angelic conflict, and completely reversed the adverse effects of Adam’s
sin.

The cross was the strategic victory over sin; all the sins of man were
imputed to Christ on the cross, and judged in Him.

The resurrection was the strategic victory over physical and spiritual
death. Physical death because of the resurrection body; spiritual death
because of the resurrection mind.

The conflict will continue, even though the handwriting is really on the
wall at this point. Evil fights on though completely beaten.

God the Father is the exception to the rule. All is under Christ’s
subjection because of the cross, resurrection and ascension. God the
Father is the exception to that. He will remain in authority over the
Son forever.

The purpose of this subjection is so that from beginning to end, God
might remain in authority and it is fitting that He is.

He was in authority over Christ in eternity past.

He remained in authority throughout human history, and even until now.

And therefore it is right that he remains forever.

(Verses 2934 form a parenthetical statement that is not pertinent to our
study, so we will skip them

**1 Cor. 15:35** picks up the subject of the actual resurrection.

“But someone will say, ‘How are the dead raised? And with what kind of
body do they come?’”

We know how death came into the world through Adam’s original sin came
both spiritual and physical death. We should also come to understand how
life will come again.

Paul begins his explanation of the mystery with an analogy from the
world of agriculture. “That which you sow does not come to life unless
it dies; and that which you sow, you do not sow the body which is to be,
but a bare grain, perhaps of wheat or of something else.”

The seed is planted in the shell of the human body, and the human body
must die in order for the seed to grow.

An entire corn stalk is not sown in order to grow another; just a seed,
and that is it.

An entire resurrection body is not placed inside of our own; just the
kernel, the seed of one is placed.

**1 Cor. 15:38,39** are an explanation of the individuality of the
resurrection bodies of all creatures.

“But God gives it a body just as He willed, and to each of the seeds a
body of its own. All flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one flesh
of men and another flesh of beasts, and another flesh of birds, and
another of fish.”

God made a sovereign decision to make our resurrection bodies in a
certain way. Since it is God’s decision, it is going to be a wonderful
body.

The flesh of each order of creatures is different, and so are the
resurrection bodies of all humans.

Heaven means inequality among resurrection bodies.

It is impossible to tell from a seed what it will grow into. So it is
with the resurrection body. You cannot tell from looking at someone how
they will turn out in heaven. Only God can tell.

The resurrection body is the result of what you do on earth with your
human spirit, which is the seed.

If you cultivate it and nourish it, it will grow into something
fantastic. If you neglect it, it will be not much.

**1 Cor. 15:40,41** continue the explanation.

“There are also heavenly bodies and earthly bodies, but the glory of the
heavenly is one, and the glory of the earthly is another. There is one
glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of
the stars; for star differs from star in glory. So also is the
resurrection of the dead.”

The heavenly bodies are used to analogize the difference in the glory of
the earthly categories. The sun is great and glorious the moon just its
reflection. Stars are far off and dim. All are different according to
the will of God.

**1 Cor. 15:42,43** tell us the about the soil into which the seed of
the resurrection body is sown.

“It is sown in a perishable body, it is raised in an imperishable body;
it is sown in dishonorable, it is raised in glory; it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a soulish body, it is raised
a spiritual body. If there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual
body.”

The soil into which the seed is planted is the human body. The body is
the perishable, the dishonorable, the weak, the soulish.

The soulish is from the Greek word *psuchikos*. Soulish is used
elsewhere in Scripture (1 Cor 2:14; James 3:15; Jude 1:19) to connote a
person without a human spirit.

The weakness is from the Greek word *astheneia*, which emphasizes the
inability of the human to make the conversion.

The perishable is obvious.

The dishonorable points the old sin nature in the cell structure of the
human flesh.

And now a comparison is made between the earthly body of Adam and his
race, and Christ and His followers.

**1 Cor. 15:45,46**, "So also it is written, ‘The first man, Adam,
became a living soul.’ The last Adam [Christ] became a life making
spirit. However, the spiritual is not first, but the natural; then the
spiritual.

Adam’s bad decision resulted in the spiritual death of the entire human
race. This is summed up in the phrase *psuche zosan* “living soul.”

A living soul is one that has human life, but not spiritual.

Human life is the sum of biological and soul life, or *psuche zosan*.

The second man’s, Christ’s, good decision resulted in the spiritual life
of all who would believe in Him.

All who believe are given spiritual life in the form of the human
spirit. All who receive the human spirit have human life, and eternal
life.

The order of things was for Adam to come first, and then Christ. The
problem must appear before the solution.

The conclusion is in 1 Cor. 15:4749.

“The first man is from the earth, earthy; the second man is from heaven.
As is the earthy, so also are those who are earthy; and as is the
heavenly, so also are those who are heavenly. And just as we have borne
the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.”

#### Seth

Seth was Adam’s third son, and after the death of Abel and the
banishment of Cain, Seth would renew Adam’s line.

Seth represents a new hope and new beginning. He was the appointed
replacement for Abel, and that is the meaning of his name (Gen. 4:2526).

Seth would father Enos at the age of one hundred and five, and he would
die when he was nine hundred and twelve years of age.

During this time in human history, people lived to ages which seem
impossible today.

The line of Christ had been cut off when Cain murdered Abel. Seth is the
renewal of that line. In a sense, he is Abel’s substitute; his
designated hitter.

#### Enosh

Enos is the Greek rendering of this name, which is more correctly
pronounced Enosh. The Greeks were indiscriminate in their rendering of
the Hebrew sin and shin, and that is why the difference.

There is one significant fact about this man: his life marks the
beginning of the great apostasy of the antediluvian civilization.

**Gen. 4:26**, “to Seth also a son was born, and he called his name
Enosh. At that time men began to cry out against the name of Yahweh.”

The word for ‘begin’ in this verse is ***h.Uh.a**l*, and it means to
pierce or penetrate something for the first time. It had a universally
negative connotation. It referred to rape, and other horrible crimes
that included penetration. It referred to the abuse of land, and even
pollution. In the context of Gen. 4:26, it means to begin something that
should never begin. It is, in essence, a rape of something that was
innocent.

The verb ‘to call’ also can be used in the negative sense. ***qArA’***
means in its basic form to call or summon someone. However, in its more
severe connotation, it has the sense of crying out, or screaming against
someone, and that is how it is used here.

The inseparable preposition ***‘bh’*** is attached to ***shEm Yahweh***
in the final part of the verse. This preposition can have many meanings,
but the one that fits best here is ‘against’.

The word ***shEm*** is translated ‘the name of’. The ancient Hebrews
believed that a person’s name represented his very essence.

Therefore, during Enosh’s lifetime, there was a great bitter outcry
against the name of the Lord. This was the beginning of the great period
of apostasy and idolatry that would characterize the antediluvian
civilization.

Enosh himself is not associated with the bitter outcry it is likely that
he remained faithful to God in spite of public opinion about Him.

#### Cainan

Although spelled Cainan in Luke’s translation, this is the Hellenization
of Qinan of the Hebrew.

We have no other information on this man, other than his place in the
line of Christ.

#### Mahalaleel

He is the son of Cainan (Kenan). There is no other reference to this man
in the Bible.

His name literally means, “to the praise of God”.

#### Enoch

Now we have someone we can talk about.

**Genesis 5:2224** tells his story:

“Enoch lived with God for three hundred years after the birth of
Methuselah (his son). Thus all the days of Enoch came to three hundred
and sixty five years. Enoch lived with God, and he was not, for God took
him.”

**Hebrews 11:5** provides us with further interpretation:

“By faith Enoch was transferred [to heaven] so that he should not see
death; and he was not found because God took him up; for he obtained the
witness that before his being taken up he was pleasing to God.”

Jude verses 14 and 15 quotes from the apocryphal book of Enoch, and it
says,

“And about these also Enoch, in the seventh generation from Adam,
prophesied, saying,”Behold, the Lord came with many thousands of His
holy ones, to execute judgment upon all, and to convict all the ungodly
of all their ungodly deeds which they have done in an ungodly way, and
of all the harsh things which ungodly sinners have spoken against Him."

When he was sixty five years of age, Enoch was transferred body, soul,
and spirit to the presence of God in heaven. There he stayed for three
hundred years, at which time his soul and spirit were painlessly removed
from his body, and he was transferred to paradise.

Enoch also was a prophet while he remained on planet earth, and he
talked about his own generation, as evidenced by his prophecy recorded
in Jude’s epistle.

Enoch lived in a time of great apostasy. This time began during the life
of Enosh, and was fully developed by the time Enoch came around.

The apostasy of that time was unbridled, since the Mosaic law had not
yet been written.

**Rom. 5:20**, “And the Law came in the side door, so that the sin might
increase; but where sin increased, grace abounded all the more.”

The time included a tremendous amount of demonism, even to the point of
sexual relations with them. The demons were attacking the genetic line
of Christ, hoping to pollute His human genetic purity and thus destroy
His role as mediator.

Therefore, they seduced human women (and only women), and impregnated
them. By the time of Noah’s life, all but Noah’s family had succumbed.

The human women were weakened by their hatred of God (see Enosh), and
easily enticed by the attractiveness of these demons.

There was great violence, and the human race was in a constant state of
war. The half angelic humans had great superhuman powers (see Hermes,
Aphrodite, Apollo, Neptune, etc and they were superintelligent and
superattractive (see Helen of Troy and Aphrodite) as well.

Many strange and terrible creatures roamed the earth, the brood of
demons. Their fossil record remains thanks to the great fossilizing
powers of the flood.

It was in this time that Enoch lived, moved to maturity following the
plan of God, and was transferred to heaven by the omnipotence of God.
Enoch did not see physical death because of his maturity, and he stands
as a precursor to resurrection.

Although Enoch was not truly resurrected, his transfer to heaven was
very much like a resurrection.

During all his time in heaven, Enoch stayed in his human body, yet face
to face with God. It is probably a comment on his maturity that he was
able to stand it, though in his sinful body.

After three hundred years of life with God, he was then transferred to
paradise, under the earth.

At the resurrection of Christ he was transferred to heaven along with
all the Old Testament Saints.

#### Methuselah

Methuselah is Enoch’s son, and Lamech’s father. His name means “man of
the dart”. It is an intriguing name, but we do not have the foggiest
idea why.

Methuselah has the distinction of being the oldest man in Biblical
history, and perhaps of all time.

Long life was a sign of blessing during Biblical times, and was
synonymous with quality of life. This being true, then Methuselah
represents the quality of eternal life within Christ’s line.

#### Lamech

Lamech forms the link between Methuselah and Noah. He lived to the age
of 777.

Nothing else is known of Lamech, but if he raised Noah, it is likely he
raised him right.

#### Noah

**Gen. 6:12**, “Now it came about, when men began to multiply on the
face of the land, and daughters were born to them. The sons of God
[fallen angels] saw that the daughters of men were beautiful; and they
took wives for themselves, whomever they chose.”

This is the period of history which we have studied so closely the last
few sections. Again, it was exceptionally degenerate, with little in the
way of checks and balances.

**Gen. 6:3**, “Then the Lord said,”My Spirit shall not contend in man
forever, because he is flesh in his going astray; but his days will be
one hundred and twenty years."

God the Holy Spirit was working nonstop during that time. He was
contending with the souls of the human race, convicting them, judging
their acts, so that they might turn to God through Jesus Christ.

From this moment on, there would be one hundred and twenty years and no
more.

**Gen. 6:4**, “The Mephilim were on the earth in those days, and also
afterward, when the sons of God came in to the daughters of men, and
they bore children to them. Those [children] were the mighty men who
were of old, men of renown.”

This verse makes the origin of the Nephilim quite clear. They are the
offspring of fallen angels and human women.

It also identifies the Nephilim with the age of heroes, made famous by
the oral tradition that came through Noah and his sons.

**Gen. 6:57** gives us God’s evaluation of this period of time:

“Then the Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth,
and that every intent of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually.. An the Lord was sorry that He had made man on the earth,
and He was grieved in His heart. And the Lord said, ’I will blot out man
whom I have created from the face of the land, from man to animals to
creeping things and to birds of the sky; for I am sorry that I have made
them.”

The revelations of Divine emotion in this passage are really
anthropopathisms. These are the assignment of human emotions to God in
order to explain some aspect of Divine policy. It is an easy way to
explain the doctrine of dispensations to the uninitiated.

God did not grieve, and He was not sorry. It only appeared so because of
the dispensational change of policy. It was time to judge the present
civilization and move on to the next.

It was all a part of the Divine outline of history, and it did not mean
that God did not know about this apostasy in eternity past.

It is true that this was not God’s direct will for the people of this
time, and that he was saddened by their negative volition.

**Gen. 6:8,9** tells us God’s evaluation of Noah,

“But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord… Noah was a righteous man,
blameless in his time; Noah walked with God.”

The “eyes” of God represent his evaluative abilities, measuring Noah to
His standards of righteousness.

The only way that Noah could have done so is through God’s grace plan,
including belief in the future savior, Jesus Christ.

That Noah walked with God is a sure indication of his fulfillment of
God’s post salvation plan.

**Gen. 6:10-22** records God’s plan for the destruction of life on
planet earth, and Noah’s salvation. A flood will come, so Noah will need
a boat. The waters will come from above and below the earth Gen. 7:11.

Noah will save many of the earth’s animal species Gen. 7:13-16. Many
others will be destroyed Gen. 7:2123.

Due to the intermingling of salt and fresh water, and the amount of silt
in the water, all but the hardiest of the fish would be killed as well.

Thus Noah and his family were preserved; while the others died to await
their future judgment.

Noah’s three sons and their wives repopulated the earth, and began the
postdiluvian civilization.

#### Shem

Shem was a voyager on the ark, and the firstborn son of Noah. He cared
for his nephew Canaan after it was discovered that he had been abused by
his father Ham, Genesis 9:2027.

In that account, He is called blessed by Noah a recognition of his
spiritual maturity.

### Christ’s Genealogy from Shem to Abraham

#### Introduction

When Noah began the building of the ark, God made a covenant with him.

**Gen. 6:18**, “But I will establish My covenant with you; and you shall
enter the ark you and your sons and your wife, and your sons wives with
you.”

Entering the ark was equivalent to entering in to the covenant with God.
The covenant was continued when Noah made his sacrifice at the landfall
of the ark when he left the ark (this was really the first ark of the
covenant).

**Gen. 8:20**, “Then Noah built an altar to the Lord, and took of every
clean animal and of every clean bird and offered burnt offerings on the
altar.”

God spells out the details of the covenant:

**Gen. 8:21**, “And the Lord smelled the soothing aroma; and the Lord
said in His heart, ’I shall not again personally cause the cursing of
the earth because of man. There is evil in the imagination of man from
his infanthood. And I shall not again personally cause the destroying of
every living creature as I have done.”

So, God makes a promise to Noah, and to the entire human race, even to
you and I in this passage. He will never again flood the earth with
water.

This is the background to the verb which is translated ‘cursing’.

***qalal*** means to diminish something. When it is used of water, it
means to drain it.

It is this same verb which is used to describe the draining of the water
after the flood.

The word used for ‘earth’ is ***Adamah***. ***Adamah*** in the feminine
means earth and all its inhabitants, and so it is here.

The final part place the blame squarely where it belongs: on man.

Therefore, this is a promise, specifically, to never flood the earth for
what man has done.

The second part has to do with the destruction of all life. God will not
destroy all life on the earth.

Notice the comment in between: There is evil in the imagination of man
from his infanthood."

In spite of man’s evil imagination, God will not again destroy the earth
and its inhabitants. Man’s imagination is evil from infanthood, and note
not from his youth.

In **Gen. 8:22**, the future conditions of the planet are defined:

“While the earth remains, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and
summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.”

With the tilting of the earth’s axis, all of the named conditions will
exist. This is in contrast to the previous stable conditions of the
planet. The environment is going to be rougher from here on out.

Man’s relationship to the animal kingdom is changed by the new covenant,
as described in **Gen. 9:2-4**.

“And the respect of you and the terror of you shall be on every beast of
the earth and on every bird of the sky; with everything that creeps on
the ground, and all the fish of the sea, into your hand they are given.
Every moving thing that is alive shall be food for you; I give all to
you, as I did the green plant. Only you shall not eat flesh with its
life, its blood.”

The change means that the beasts will respect good human beings, and be
terrified of the bad. In all cases their subordination is required. It
is because of fear that animals are violent.

All animals are now O.K. to eat. The lifeblood of that creature must be
drained before it is eaten, but that is the only requirement.

The third part of the covenant had to do with capital punishment.

**Gen. 9:5,6**, “And surely I will require your lifeblood; from every
beast I will require it. And from every man, from every man’s brother I
will require the life of man. Whoever sheds man’s blood, by man his
blood shall be shed, for in the image of God He made man.”

This is crucial, for before the flood there was no capital punishment,
which is the major restraint on criminal activity. Capital punishment is
ordained from this moment forward. If man or beast kills a man, he will
be killed by man.

This would be a major difference from before the flood. Man is now
responsible for policing himself, which provides a restraint on the
function of the old sin nature.

The fourth part of the covenant is the sign of the promise.

Read Gen. 9:8-17

So the covenant is made and the transfer is made to postdiluvian
civilization. Let’s pick up the line of Christ again with Shem.

#### Shem

Shem was the son of Noah. He was about 98 years old when he entered the
ark with the rest of his family. He fathered many children, including
Arphaxad, who would carry the line of Christ.

The land occupied by the descendants of Shem (Gen. 10:2131) encompasses
all of what would become the Jews under the covenant of Abraham. It
includes Syria, Chaldea, parts of Assyria, Persia, and the Arabian
peninsula.

Noah predicts that the people of Canaan would serve under the Semites.

#### Arphaxad, or Arphachshad

He was born two years after the flood, conceived not long after the ark
hit dry land.

He apparently settled in the mountainous country in the Northeast, and
we really do not know much else about this man.

#### Cainan

Cainan was the son of Arphaxad. He is not mentioned in the original
table of nations in Gen., but for some reason Moses skipped him and went
to his son, Shelah. Nothing else is known about this man.

#### Shelah

The son of Cainan; the father of Heber.

#### Heber

This man’s name means ‘fellowship’. In the Hebrew, it is really Eber.

The son of Shelah, the father of Peleg.

He is the founder of the Hebrew race, and he gave his name to it, Gen.
10:21.

#### Peleg

His name means division, and it was during his lifetime that the nations
were divided.

The first crisis of the postdiluvian civilization was due to the tower
of Babel. When God put down that attempt, the nations of the earth were
formed, and the earth divided into geographical national boundaries for
the very first time.

#### Reu

He is the son of Peleg and the father of Serug. His name means,
‘friend’. Nothing else is known.

#### Serug

He is the son of Reu. His name means ‘shoot, or tendril’ in the Hebrew.
There is an ancient city by this name, and it may have something to do
with this man.

#### Nahor

Do not confuse this man with the brother of Abraham. This Nahor lived in
the 23rd century B.C., and is the grandfather of Abraham. His name means
snorting or snoring.

#### Terah

He was born in Ur of the Chaldees. His name means ‘antelope’. Joshua
24:2 tells us that this man was involved in idolatry. He did take place
in the big move to Canaan, with the rest of the family. He died about
2100 B.C.

### The Abraham Connection

From Abraham to David, there are fourteen generations. Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Judah, Perez, Hezron, Ram, Admin, Amminadab, Nahshon, Salmon,
Boaz, Obed, Jesse, David.

Between the genealogies in Luke and Matthew there is only one
difference, and that is the Luke’s insertion of Admin between Ram and
Amminadab. This points out the reality of skipped generations in
genealogy lists.

It was a common practice to skip a generation and go from grandfather to
grandson. Sometimes that generation was skipped due to a spiritual
failure in the person in question; more often, there is no reason given.

We will concentrate on Abraham, Nahshon, and Boaz in this line.

This line covers the age of the patriarchs, from God’s covenant with
Abraham to the next covenant with David. Its chronology runs from
Abraham’s birth in 2160 B.C. to Israel under king Saul in 1004 B.C.

#### Abraham.

**Gen. 12:13** records Abram’s first call:

“Now the Lord said to Abram, ‘Go forth from your country, and from your
relatives and from your father’s house, to the land which I will show
you; And I will make you a great nation, and I will bless you, and make
your name great; and so you shall be a blessing; and I will bless those
who bless you, and the one who curses you I will curse. And in you all
the families of the earth will be blessed.’”

Abraham had to leave his own country because God had a wonderful place
reserved for him and his progeny. He also had to leave because his first
home and his family and relatives would have been a fatal distraction to
him.

### The covenants to Israel

God provided the nation of Israel a fantastic portfolio of grace
blessings in the form of covenants. A covenant is based on the
attributes of God.

-   It finds its motive in the love of God. There is nothing treacherous
    or deceitful about a covenant.

-   It finds its modus operandi in grace. God gives based on his
    thinking, power, and merit.

-   It finds its dependability in faithfulness. The blessings always
    wait for Israel to take them.

-   It finds its timing and organization in order. Everything is
    arranged by the capabilities of God in eternity past.

-   It finds its enactment in the sovereignty of God. God chooses to
    bless Israel.

-   It finds its revelation in the truth of God. God is forthright and
    clear and honest in His communication of the details of His
    covenants. He always keeps His Word.

The only thing that Israel is to provide is their acceptance of the very
first covenant, which is the spiritual one. The spiritual covenant is
the relationship with God provision. In it, God provides Israel with
everything that they need to have a national relationship with Him.

They have the information that they need in order to have a relationship
with Him.

They have the power that they need in order to have a relationship with
Him.

They have the righteousness that they need in order to have a
relationship with Him.

This relationship with God is the greatest of all the covenants, and it
provides the best of the blessings.

Abraham is an example: until he got his relationship with God on track,
he would not receive the remainder of his covenant blessings.

During the age of Israel, only racial Jews receive the blessings of the
covenants to Israel.

Individual Gentiles may still fulfill the plan of God for individuals,
and they may share in the covenants to Israel by way of blessing by
association.

The covenant to Abraham includes the promised land, a new and unique
race, blessing by association to all who bless his race, a curse on the
anti-Semitic, and a messianic clause.

The land is defined in Gen. 15:18-21.

The Jews must fulfill the spiritual covenant, and accept Christ as
Messiah in order to fully inherit this land. This will not occur until
the second advent of Christ. This is the messianic clause.

The new and unique race is formed at the conception of Abraham’s first
son by Sarah, providing a brand new genetic race through the seed of
Abraham.

All who bless the Jews are in turn blessed by God. Throughout history
the Jews encounter a massive amount of murderous persecution. Whenever a
person or a nation provides protection, or aides them in some way, or
just has a virtuous mental attitude about their race, that person or
nation is blessed by God.

All who curse the Jews are in turn cursed by God. anti-Semitism is a
death wish.

Abram did as the Lord commanded, and went out from Ur when he was 75
years of age.

Abram means, “top father (as in rank), or exalted father (as in
respect)”.

Sarai means, “contentious woman”.

When he arrived in the new land at Shechem, he worshipped God. Soon
after Abram arrived in the new land, a terrible famine hit, and he went
down to Egypt to eat. This caused a complication.

Abram feared that he would be killed by the Egyptians if they knew that
Sarai was his wife, because she was very beautiful.

He was an oaf, and cared more about his safety than what would happen to
Sarai in the Egyptian harem.

Therefore, he lied to the Egyptians, and told them that Sarai was his
sister.

Pharaoh took Sarai for his own, but by stealing her (unwittingly) from
Abram he was the first to invoke the cursing clause of the Abrahamic
covenant.

When the cursing hit, Sarai blabbed the whole deal to Pharaoh, and so
Pharaoh was upset with Abram, but he did not kill him! He was honorable
and gave Sarai back and sent the whole entourage back to Canaan.

When he arrived, Abram held a worship service in honor of the Lord.
Apparently he had recovered from his devious ways.

When Abram returned to the land, he and his nephew Lot were so
prosperous that their herds were always getting tangled together, and
their shepherds were at the point of engaging in a range war. Therefore,
Lot decided to go down into the Jordan valley with his bunch in order to
avoid further confrontations.

After a time, Lot became entangled in a local war. Genesis 14 tells the
story.

When Lot was living down in the Jordan valley, the kings of Sodom and
Gomorrah fought a big battle, where they were defeated.

Lot got himself tangled up in it all somehow, and he was captured by the
victors. They took their spoil and Lot as well and left for points
North.

Abram heard about this and did the honorable thing: he took the men of
his household, 318 all told, and formed them into a fighting force.

They must have been well trained, because they pulled off the most
difficult of all military maneuvers, a coordinated night action.

They rescued Lot and all his goods, and returned to their homes.

It is here that Abram has another worship service.

Next is the story of Abraham’s offspring.

#### Abraham’s Offspring

The story of Sarai’s treachery begins in Genesis 16.

“Now Sarai, Abram’s wife had borne him no children, and she had an
Egyptian maid whose name was Hagar. So Sarai said to Abram, ‘Now behold,
the Lord has prevented me from bearing children. Please go in to may
maid; perhaps I shall be built up through her.’ And Abram listened to
the voice of Sarai. And after Abram had lived ten years in the land of
Canaan, Abram’s wife Sarai took Hagar the Egyptian, her maid, and gave
her to her husband Abram as his wife. And he went in to Hagar, and she
conceived; and when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was
despised in her sight. And Sarai said to Abram, ‘May the wrong done me
be upon you. I gave my maid into your arms; but when she saw she had
conceived, I was despised in her sight. May the Lord judge between you
and me.’”

This was not a good marriage. We have already seen the treachery of
Abraham, and now it is Sarai’s turn.

Sarai is barren, and no doubt she had quite a complex about it. So Sarai
conceives a plan. Maybe Abram was bugging her all the time about
children. Maybe the incident with Pharaoh had turned her off to him in
some way.

Because of all this, Sarai just wanted to get it over with. However, she
did not realize, that God’s plan included her as well.

And Abraham was dumb enough to go along with the plan.

Of course, Hagar conceived right away, and after living for so long with
Sarai, the contentious woman and no doubt the contentious master, she
could not help but exult over her.

Poor Sarai. Her plan had failed miserably. What was worse, she had this
daily reminder of her failure to give Abram an heir. Every time that
Hagar craved new and unusual food combinations she probably winked in
Sarai’s direction.

The first thing that Sarai did was to try to take it out on her husband.
“I may have suggested it, but you didn’t have to go through with it.
This is all your fault!” She had become quite irrational.

The second thing that Sarai did was to try to take it out on Hagar. She
verbally and mentally and physically abused this poor pregnant woman.
Hagar had to leave.

But the Lord would deal justly with Hagar, and she believed in him, and
returned to the authority of Sarai, and things were better from then.

Now this plan had backfired terribly, and both Abram and Sarai suffered
for it.

There is no Biblical record of the next fifteen years. But we know from
the next part of their lives, Abram and Sarai have improved their
relationship with God tremendously.

In Genesis 17, the story picks up again.

"Now when Abram was ninety-nine years old, the Lord appeared to Abram
and said to him, ‘I am God Almighty; walk before Me, and be blameless.
And I will establish My covenant between Me and you, and I will multiply
you exceedingly.’ And Abram fell on his face, and God talked with him,
saying, ‘As for Me, behold, My covenant is with you, and you will be the
father of a multitude of nations. No longer will your name be called
Abram, but your name will be Abraham; for I will make you the father of
a multitude of nations. And I will make you exceedingly fruitful, and I
will make nations of you, and kings shall come forth from you. And I
will establish My covenant between Me and you and your descendants after
you throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be God
to you and to your descendants after you. And I will give to you and to
your descendants after you, the land of your sojournings, all the land
of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.’

God renews the covenant with Abram because Abram has grown spiritually
to the point where he has capacity for all the great covenant blessing
that God has prepared for him.

Abram falls on his face because he now has true humility. This is a
humility that can only come from an intimate knowledge of God. Abram
developed that knowledge over the fifteen years since the Hagar
disaster.

Now Abram is Abraham, the father of a multitude. Now he is ready for the
next test.

**Gen. 16:9**, “God said further to Abraham, ‘Now as for you, you will
keep My covenant, you and your descendants after you throughout their
generations. This is My covenant, which you will keep, between Me and
you and your descendants after you: every male among you shall be
circumcised. And you shall be circumcised in the flesh of your foreskin;
and it will be a sign of the covenant between Me and you.’”

Had Abraham not been a mature believer, he probably would have said
something along the lines of, “You want me to do what to my what?!”
Instead, he humbly complies.

And, he must have been a great leader, because his entire household was
under the requirement as well. “You want us to do what to our whats?!”

But this was the beginning of the miraculous birth of Isaac.

#### The Birth of Isaac

**Gen. 17:1-5**, “Then God said to Abraham, ‘As for Sarai your wife, you
will not call her name Sarai, but Sarah will be her name. And I will
bless her, and she will be a mother of nations; kings of peoples will
come from her.’ Then Abraham fell on his face and laughed, and said in
his heart, ‘Will a child be born to a man one hundred years old? And
will Sarah, who is ninety years old, bear a child?’ And Abraham said to
God, ‘Oh that Ishmael might live before thee!’ But God said, ‘No, but
Sarah your wife will bear you a son, and you will call his name Isaac;
and I will establish My covenant with him for an everlasting covenant
for his descendants after him.’”

The birth of Isaac would mean the creation of a new race on the planet
the race of the Jew.

The new race had these assets:

Client nation status. They were a nation that had a special relationship
with God, and they were used as a witness to the entire world.

A special code, in the Mosaic Law.

A great land in which to live.

Fantastic leadership, in the Davidic dynasty.

A wonderful future, under the leadership of Jesus Christ in the
Millennium.

Unique mental prosperity, which provides the basis for success in any
endeavor.

The purpose for the new race was to represent God as a witness to the
entire world during the last half of the Old Testament dispensation; to
stand as the sole witness to the world during the tribulation; to serve
as the basis for the people of the millennium.

The new race was being propagated for their leader, who would come more
than two thousand years later.

The impact of the new race in history. Prosemitism would always receive
blessing by association. anti-Semitism would always receive cursing by
association.

In this passage, Abraham listens to what God has to say, and comes to an
erroneous conclusion.

He thinks it through, laughing all the while.

Sarah cannot have children.

I cannot give her what she needs to have children.

Then the Lord must want to use Ishmael as my seed, and must have all
along!

Wrong, says God.

### Isaac to Jesse

Isaac was born to Abraham and Sarah. He would marry Rebekhah, and father
the twins, Jacob and Esau. It is worthwhile to note that Rebekhah, too,
was barren. She was the second in the line to find healing in God.
Another miracle to continue the line of Christ.

Jacob. This man was no prince, at least at first. He took advantage of
his older brother, Esau, and took his birthright from him. Later he
would wrestle with God, and in that match he would win God’s respect.
God changed his name to Israel, ‘wrestler with God’.

Judah was one of the twelve sons of Israel. Tamar, the widow of both his
first and second sons, tricked him into sexual relations by disguising
herself has a prostitute. Tamar did this as revenge, because Judah had
wronged her by not giving her to his third son. She became pregnant by
this liaison, and bore him twin sons. Judah would go on to spiritual
maturity, in spite of his early handicaps.

Perez was the second born son of Judah, the second of twins. However, he
was the one through which the line of Christ would run. Not much is know
about this man, except his birth.

Hezron forms a link in the genealogy, but not much else is known about
him.

Ram forms another link.

#### Amminadab

We know only one thing about this man: his daughter was the wife of
Aaron the High Priest under Moses. He was a man of the Exodus, and he
died in the desert.

#### Nahshon

Now we can tell something of this man. His sister Elisheba was married
to Aaron. He was also a man of the Exodus generation, the captain of the
tribe of Judah. He must have been a talented military leader, but he
died in the desert with the rest of his generation.

#### Salmon

Salmon married Rahab, the famous prostitute of Jericho. Although little
is mentioned of Salmon, Rahab deserves mention.

She was a prostitute in the town of Jericho, and when two spies from the
army of Israel come to scout the town they are going to destroy, they
happen upon Rahab’s house of ill repute (O.K., even 3500 years ago
military men had an instinct for this sort of thing).

She saved these two spies from certain death by hiding them.

Rahab speaks to the two spies, and here is what she said, “I know that
the Lord has given you the land, and that the terror of you has fallen
on us, and that all the inhabitants of the land have melted away before
you. For we have heard how the Lord dried up the water of the Red Sea
before you when you came out of Egypt, and what you did to the two kings
of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, to Sihan and Og, who you
totally destroyed. And when we heard it, our hearts melted and no
courage remained in any man any longer because of you; for the Lord you
God, He is God in heaven above and on earth beneath.”

Then the spies promise her that she and her family will be spared, and
they are.

Rahab and her extended family were the only survivors of the town of
Jericho. All the others were killed. Rahab lived out her years with the
nation of Israel, and she married Salmon.

Boaz was the son of Salmon and Rahab the prostitute. It was his destiny
to marry a foreign woman named Ruth.

Elimelech lived in Bethlehem with his wife Naomi and two sons, Mahlon
and Chilion.

A famine came upon the land, and so Elimelech took his wife and sons to
the land of Moab.

Elimelech died in Moab, and after his death, his sons took Moabite women
for wives. Their names were Ruth and Orpah (not Oprah).

Sadly, both the sons also died before they could give sons to their
wives.

After some quibbling, Ruth determined to return to Bethlehem with her
mother in law, while the other daughter in law stayed in Moab.

Ruth believed in God, and she wanted to be in the land of promise.

By her hard work in the fields she earned the respect of Boaz, a man of
Bethlehem, and eventually he would marry her.

Through Ruth and Boaz, the line of Christ was continued.

#### Obed

…was the son of Ruth and Boaz, and he was the grandfather of David.

#### Jesse

…Obed’s son, was David’s father.

Up to this point, we have studied some of the covenants of God with
Israel.

The Noahic Covenant, where God promised never again to destroy the world
by flood, and where God established man’s responsibility to capital
punishment.

The Abrahamic Covenant, where God established a new racial species.

The Mosaic Covenant, which was the national policy covenant for the
nation of Israel.

Next God established the Davidic, or Messianic, Covenant. This was the
leadership covenant for the nation of Israel.

The leadership covenant for Israel described a man who would be their
great leader, and who would combine the three offices of prophet,
priest, and king.

Christ fulfilled all three covenants.

As prophet, He spoke of His kingdom, and offered it to the Jews, but
they rejected Him.

As priest, he died for the sins of the world, but the Jews would not
receive Him.

Because the Jews rejected Christ as prophet and priest, He could not be
their king, which was their only desire. Because of the Jew’s rejection
of Christ, His earthly kingdom was delayed, and the church age was
inserted into history.

The Jews were not unlike many other people in history. They desired an
outside solution to their problems, a panacea that would remove their
troubles quickly and permanently.

They did not see that their humility was required, and the circumcision
of their hearts needed to precede the rescue of their nation.

They were too proud to back down from their arrogant legalism, and love
of the cosmic system.

From their pride they desired a king that would solve their problems, so
that they could go on with their arrogance.

From their pride they rejected the man who was also a prophet and a
priest.

There are many passages in the Old Testament which refer to the Messiah,
the king after the pattern of David.

**Gen. 3:15**, “I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between
your seed and her seed; he shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise
his heel.”

This is the first prediction of the Messiah. It communicates to Satan
that the future Messiah will come from the seed of the woman.

Because of the process of meiosis, each month the woman produces an ovum
which is without the genetic pollution of the old sin nature. This made
it possible for Mary to conceive by the Holy Spirit, and bring forth a
child that did not have the old sin nature, and thus would not receive
the condemnation of Adam’s original sin.

The last part of the prophecy concerns the ultimate victory of Christ.
Christ will wound the head of Satan. This is a metaphor, and can refer
to many things. It is probably a reference to the death, resurrection,
ascension, and session of Christ.

Satan will wound the heel of Christ. Although this is often interpreted
as referring to the cross, the meaning of \`Aqibh does not lend itself
well to this. More likely it refers to the followers of Jesus Christ,
who are subject to persecution throughout the ages. This is likely
especially in light of its position opposite of rO’sh, head.

**Gen. 12:3**, “I will bless those who bless you, and him who curses you
I will curse; and by you all the families of the earth shall bless
themselves.”

Of course, this is the Abrahamic covenant. Through the seed of Abraham
came Christ, and through the death of Christ all nations and all people
were blessed.

**Gen. 22:18**, “and by your descendants shall all the nations of the
earth bless themselves, because you have obeyed my voice.”

This is a reaffirmation of the Abrahamic covenant.

The reflexive pronoun ‘themselves’ denotes the function of volition
related to salvation and post salvation spiritual growth.

Christ the Messiah is the source of these blessings.

**Gen. 49:8,10**, "Judah, your brothers shall praise you; your hand
shall be on the neck of your enemies; your father’s sons shall bow down
before you. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the ruler’s
staff from between his feet, until he comes to whom it belongs; and to
him shall be the obedience of the peoples.

These verse confirm that the Messianic line runs through Judah.

It also emphasizes the royalty of the Messiah that he would be a king.

**Deut 18:18**, “I will raise up for them a prophet like you from among
their brethren; and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak
to them all that I command him.”

This is a preview of the prophetic office and function of Christ. Christ
will speak only what God commands.

It is worthwhile to note that the Jews had this verse available to them,
and yet they still rejected Christ.

**2 Sam 7:11-16**, "from the time that I appointed judges over my people
Israel; and I will give you rest from all your enemies. Moreover the
LORD declares to you that the LORD will make you a house.

When your days are fulfilled and you lie down with your fathers, I will
raise up your offspring after you, who shall come forth from your body,
and I will establish his kingdom.

He shall build a house for my name, and I will establish the throne of
his kingdom for ever.

I will be his father, and he shall be my son. When he commits iniquity,
I will chasten him with the rod of men, with the stripes of the sons of
men;

but I will not take my steadfast love from him, as I took it from Saul,
whom I put away from before you.

And your house and your kingdom shall be made sure for ever before me;
your throne shall be established for ever.’"

This is a prediction of the coming of king David. Furthermore, it
predicts that the house of David will last forever. It also describes
the relationship of God to the Messiah: Father to Son.

It hints at the death of the Messiah that He will take the stripes (the
whipping) of men.

**2 Sam 23:5**, “Yea, does not my house stand so with God? For he has
made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and secure.
For will he not cause to prosper all my help and my desire?”

Here is communicated the everlasting nature of the Davidic covenant. It
exists in the Divine decree. It is secure, regardless of what Israel
will do, and they will do a lot. Also it is the communication of the
prosperity which comes from the Messiah.

**Psalm 2**, "Why do the nations conspire, and the peoples plot in vain?

The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel
together, against the LORD and his anointed, saying,

“Let us burst their bonds asunder, and cast their cords from us.”

He who sits in the heavens laughs; the LORD has them in derision.

Then he will speak to them in his wrath, and terrify them in his fury,
saying,

“I have set my king on Zion, my holy hill.”

I will tell of the decree of the LORD: He said to me, "You are my son,
today I have begotten you.

Ask of me, and I will make the nations your heritage, and the ends of
the earth your possession.

You shall break them with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a
potter’s vessel."

Now therefore, O kings, be wise; be warned, O rulers of the earth.

Serve the LORD with fear, with trembling

kiss his feet, lest he be angry, and you perish in the way; for his
wrath is quickly kindled. Blessed are all who take refuge in him."

This is the first reference to the Messiah as the anointed one. The word
‘Christ’ means ‘anointed one’.

Anointing with oil was a metaphor for the ministry of the Spirit.

People in ancient times used oil for light. The Spirit sheds His light
on the Word, so that we might understand it.

People in ancient times used oil for a medicinal ointment. The ministry
of the Spirit with the Word heals our souls.

People in ancient times used oil as a cosmetic. The ministry of the
Spirit leads to true beauty the beauty of the soul full of Truth.

People in ancient times used oil to anoint the bodies of the dead. The
Spirit is the member of the Godhead who resurrects the dead.

People in ancient times used oil to cook and flavor their food. The
ministry of the Spirit in the Word flavors our lives, making them not
only palatable, but enjoyable.

Christ was the Messiah, the anointed one. He is the keystone of our
faith, and without Him and all that He has done our faith has no
meaning. The Spirit ministered to our Lord from his birth. In Jesus
Christ was manifest the fullness of the Holy Spirit all of the things
that anointing represents.

**Psalm 16**, "Preserve me, O God, for in thee I take refuge.

I say to the LORD, “Thou art my Lord; I have no good apart from thee.”
As for the saints in the land, they are the noble, in whom is all my
delight. Those who choose another god multiply their sorrows; their
libations of blood I will not pour out or take their names upon my lips.

The LORD is my chosen portion and my cup; thou holdest my lot.

The lines have fallen for me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly
heritage.

I bless the LORD who gives me counsel; in the night also my heart
instructs me.

I keep the LORD always before me; because he is at my right hand, I
shall not be moved.

Therefore my heart is glad, and my soul rejoices; my body also dwells
secure.

For thou dost not give me up to Sheol, or let thy godly one see the Pit.

Thou dost show me the path of life; in thy presence there is fullness of
joy, in thy right hand are pleasures for evermore."

The key phrase in this passage is “in thy right hand”. Jesus Christ
would sit down at the right hand of God after the ascension. This is
called His Session.

The session of Christ represents the finished state of all His work, and
the accomplishment of the strategic victory of the angelic conflict.

**Read Psalm 22.**

This is a long passage that records with perfect accuracy the first
person narrative of Christ on the cross.

The gospels have very little information on what Christ thought while He
was dying for our sins just a few short verbal expressions. However, the
thoughts were recorded one thousand years before the event in this
Psalm.

The physical details given in this Psalm hit the experience of
crucifixion right on the head. In fact, there is no other explanation.

**Read Psalm 110**

In this passage there is a repetition of the session of Christ.
Furthermore, it emphasizes the royalty of the Messiah, and his
priesthood.

Melchizedek was a priest and a king during the age of the patriarchs. He
once had a brief association with Abraham. Melchizedek was the king of
Salem, which was the city of Jerusalem at that time. Christ will be the
king of Jerusalem in the millennium and in the eternal state.

Finally, there is mention of His sovereignty, which He will reveal to
the entire world for the first time at the second advent.

**Read Isaiah 2.**

Isaiah chapter two concentrates on the millennial rule of Christ. Christ
will rule over a magnificent kingdom, in which peace and prosperity are
the rule.

All the arrogance of man and the fallen angels is brought down, because
of the greatness of the day of the Lord. An end will come to all
idolatry. An utter and final end.

You should note that this passage hints at the idea of idolatry as being
the source of the earth’s many ills, including poverty and war.

Isaiah 7:14 records two details concerning the Messiah. That His mother
will conceive Him while a virgin, and she will call His name Immanuel.

**Isaiah 9:1-7**, “But there will be no more gloom for her who was in
anguish; in earlier times He treated the land of Zebulun and the land of
Naphtali with contempt, but later on He shall make it glorious, by the
way of the sea, on the other side of Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles.
The people who walk in darkness will see a great light; those who live
in a dark land, the light will shine on them. Thou shalt multiply the
nation, thou shalt increase their gladness; they will be glad in Thy
presence as with the gladness of harvest, as men rejoice when they
divide the spoil. For Thou shalt break the yoke of their burden and the
staff on their shoulders, the rod of their oppressor, as at the battle
of Midian. For every boot of the booted warrior in the battle tumult,
and cloak rolled in blood, will be for burning, fuel for the fire. For a
child will be born to us, a son will be given to us; and the government
will rest on His shoulders; and His name will be called Wonderful
Counselor, Mighty God, Eternal Father, Prince of Peace. There will be no
end to the increase of His government or of peace, on the throne of
David and over his kingdom, to establish it and to uphold it with
justice and righteousness from then on and forevermore. The zeal of the
Lord of hosts will accomplish this.”

Here again is the millennial reign of Jesus Christ.

Also, this passage establishes the location of the hometown of Christ,
and the place where much of His ministry will take place.

Zebulun and Naphtali are two tribes of Israel. Their tribal boundaries
form the area to the West and Southwest of the Sea of Galilee.

Included in these territories is the town of Nazareth, the hometown of
Jesus Christ.

They are made glorious because of the ministry of Christ around them.

**Isaiah 11:1-5**, “Then a shoot will spring from the stem of Jesse, and
a branch from his roots will bear fruit. And the Spirit of the Lord will
rest on Him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord.
And He will delight in the fear of the Lord, and He will not judge by
what His eyes see, nor make a decision by what His ears hear; but with
righteousness He will judge the poor, and decide with fairness for the
afflicted of the earth; and He will strike the earth with the rod of His
mouth, and with the breath of His lips He will slay the wicked. Also
righteousness will be the belt about His limbs, and faithfulness the
belt about His waist.”

This passage concentrates on the prophetic character of Christ.

Through the Spirit and the Word, Christ will be the greatest prophet of
all time.

Isaiah 40 proclaims the coming of the Messiah to the people of Israel.

Comfort, comfort my people, says your God. Speak tenderly to Jerusalem,
and cry to her that her warfare is ended, that her iniquity is pardoned,
that she has received from the LORD’s hand double for all her sins. A
voice cries: “In the wilderness prepare the way of the LORD, make
straight in the desert a highway for our God. Every valley shall be
lifted up, and every mountain and hill be made low; the uneven ground
shall become level, and the rough places a plain. And the glory of the
LORD shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together, for the
mouth of the LORD has spoken.”

This passage predicts the ministry of John the Baptist. This passage
hearkens back to the wilderness journey of Israel.

It emphasizes the need for faith perception of the truth. For us, it
looks forward to the coming of Christ, or our joining with him.

Read Isaiah 42. It establishes the purpose of the Messiah. "

These verses spell out the purpose of the life of Christ.

He will bring justice to the nations.

He will open the eyes that are blind.

He will set free the prisoners from the dungeon of the cosmic system.

The passage also confirms that these things are a part of the Divine
Decree in eternity past.

Read Isaiah 49, which records the call of the Messiah.

This call will result in the salvation of Israel, and of all mankind. It
will solve all problems, no matter how great. It will bring about the
millennium.

**Isaiah 53** records the substitionary spiritual death of Christ, a
priestly function.

This is really important, because it records the purpose of the death of
the Messiah. He is to die a substitutionary spiritual death, one that
will pay for the sins of all mankind. It is a great sacrifice, and so
God gives Him a great destiny.

**Jer 23:5-6**, “Behold, the days are coming,” declares the Lord, “When
I shall raise up for David a righteous Branch; and He will reign as king
and act wisely and do justice and righteousness in the land. In His days
Judah will be saved, and Israel will dwell securely ; and this is His
name by which He will be called, the Lord our righteousness.”

**Daniel 7:27**, “Then the sovereignty, the dominion, and the greatness
of all the kingdoms under the whole heaven will be given to the people
of the saints of the Highest One; His kingdom will be an everlasting
kingdom, and all the dominions will serve and obey Him.”

This is a passage which describes the eternal kingdom of God under the
rulership of Jesus Christ.

It tells of the gathering of all nations, human and angelic, and their
subordination to Christ at the Great White Throne.

**Micah 5:2**, “But as for you, Bethlehem Ephrathah, too little to be
among the clans of Judah, from you One will go forth for Me to be ruler
in Israel. His goings forth are from long ago, from the days of
eternity.”

The eternal nature of Jesus Christ is set forth here. He is truly God.
Micah also identifies His birthplace Bethlehem.

**Zech 12:10**, “And I will pour out on the house of David and on the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of supplication, so
that they will look on Me whom they have pierced; and they will mourn
for Him, as one mourns for an only son, and they will weep bitterly over
Him, like the bitter weeping over a first born.”

This is a little different. It records the crucifixion of Christ as it
relates to the Jews who demand His crucifixion. The Jews turned against
Christ, and demanded his death over that of Barabbas, a common criminal
who had participated in an insurrection against the Roman rule.

**Malachi 3:1**, “Behold, I am going to send My messenger, and he will
clear the way before Me. And the Lord, whom you seek, will suddenly come
to His temple; and the messenger of the covenant, in whom you delight,
behold, He is coming,” says the Lord of hosts.

There are two predictions here. First, the prophet predicts the ministry
of John the Baptist. Second, there is a prediction concerning the
scouring of the Temple, which actually occurred on two occasions.

#### David, the Forerunner of Christ

King David was the forerunner of Christ in at least three ways:

In his selection by Samuel the prophet.

In the establishment and administration of his kingdom.

In his relationship with God. The words of a man on his deathbed reveal
a lot about him. David, for all of his sin and tragedy was a man of God.

**Read 1 Samuel 16**

### David to the Exile

Joseph’s Line, the Legal Line of Christ (Matthew).

#### Solomon

Solomon was a true genius, and he exploited that genius by having a
great relationship with God. “Now God gave Solomon wisdom and very great
discernment and breadth of mind, like the sand that is on the seashore.
And Solomon’s wisdom surpassed the wisdom of all the sons of the east
and all the wisdom of Egypt. For he was wiser than all men, than Ethan
the Ezrahite, Heman, Calcol, and Darda, the sons of mahol; and his fame
was known in all the surrounding nations. He also spoke 3,000 proverbs,
and his songs were 1,005. And he spoke of trees, from the cedar that is
in Lebanon even to the hyssop that grows on the wall; he spoke also of
animals and birds and creeping things and fish. And men came from all
peoples to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all the kings of the earth
who had heard of his wisdom.”

Yet, Solomon became involved with the queen of Sheba, and his lust for
her nearly destroyed him. Toward the end of his life he wrote a
testimony to the folly of his lust. We have that testimony recorded in
the Bible it is the book of Ecclesiastes.

“Futility of futilities! All is futility!” Is the tone of the book.

Solomon then proceeds to record all of his accomplishments, and all of
his doings, he says, added up to nothing.

His final conclusion was this: “The conclusion, when all has been heard,
is: fear God, and keep His commandments, because this applies to every
person. for God will bring every act to judgment, everything which is
hidden, whether it is good or evil.”

#### Rehoboam

The son of Solomon, he was a weak king, and although he wanted the right
things, he lacked the leadership to bring them about.

He wanted a unified kingdom, but the Northern kingdom of Israel split
from him.

He wanted the pure worship of God, but the entire nation rebelled and
conducted even the most depraved forms of idol worship.

He was an immoral man, and he had a knack for making bad decisions from
a position of weakness.

#### Abijah

Abijah saw the split of the two nations in a very black and white way.
The Northern kingdom had rebelled, and must be forcibly brought back
under the reign of one. That one, of course, was him.

He fought a great battle with Jeroboam, and though he won, he was unable
to bring the rebels under his rule. The kingdom remained divided.

Abijah was also an immoral man, and he too was a failure as a king.

#### Asa

Asa returned to the pure worship of God. Although he allowed idolatry to
exist, he emphasized what was true and right: the ritual plan of God.

Prosperity also returned to the southern kingdom. Many came down from
the north because in him they saw a renewal of David’s glory.

However, he did make a great mistake towards the end of his life.
Zealous to make the northern kingdom return to the rule of God, he
allied with a pagan nation, Syria.

Asa became ill and did not seek God’s help. Depending on his household
physicians, he died.

#### Jehoshaphat

This man, a king, was a winner. He sought the Lord with all his heart,
and he made his nation a good place. When his nation was threatened, he
turned the entire nation to God.

**Read 2 Chron. 20.**

Jehoshaphat was benevolent and wise, and both his foreign and domestic
policies were effective. He lived out his life peacefully, satisfied
because of his great relationship with God.

#### Joram

Not much is known about this man, other than his father.

#### Uzziah

Uzziah was another great man, who followed the Lord for most of his
life. He grew to have a great relationship with God under the ministry
of the prophet Zechariah.

He had a great career as king, but he became proud, and in his pride he
overstepped the bounds of his authority and tried to perform a priestly
function. For that sin, God gave him leprosy, and he remained a leper
until the day of his death.

#### Jotham

Jotham was also a great king, and he turned out to be great even than
his father, for he did not become arrogant because of his success.

He died a contented man, confident before God of his eternal future.

The people were not completely responsive to his leadership, but Judah
still became much stronger through him.

#### Ahaz

This man was a loser. He refused to depend on God refused to believe in
Him. He was instead an idolater, and as king he did many evil things.

He allied Judah with Assyria, and paid tribute to Tiglath-Pileser their
king, even sending him the Temple treasures.

When he died, no one missed him, and the people did not think him worthy
to be buried with the other kings of Israel.

#### Hezekiah

Hezekiah was a good and Godly king, who from his relationship with God
desired to repair the damage that his father had done.

The Assyrian menace was great during this time, and he did everything he
could to strengthen his own nation so that they might withstand the
enemy.

The first priority was spiritual and moral.

After that he saw to it that the economy and the army were greatly
improved.

The Northern kingdom of Israel went out under the fifth cycle of
discipline during his reign, and their destruction together with the
Sunday school ministry of Isaiah served to bring the southern kingdom
under the Divine standards once again.

Under his rule a great building program took place.

Hezekiah became deathly ill, and it looked like the end was near.
However, he had no heir at the time, and of course the line of Christ
was through him. He prayed for his own life, and trusted in God, and God
extended his life for another 15 years. It was during that time that he
fathered a son, Manasseh.

#### Manasseh

Manasseh ruled for fifty five years. His was the longest rule of any of
the kings of Judah. He was an extremely evil man, who hated God and his
Word.

The prophets prophesied against him, but he only persecuted them all the
more.

Because he was so evil, God sent the Assyrians against him, who captured
him and carted him off to Babylon.

This Divine discipline worked, because Manasseh repented, and removed
all the idols and idolatrous altars that he could.

Though he had been very evil, he died in peace, knowing the forgiveness
of his savior.

#### Amon

Unfortunately, Amon imitated all of the evil of his own father, and
failed to repent. He died the victim of a conspiracy, and his eight year
old son took the throne in his place.

#### Josiah

When Josiah had reigned for 12 years he began a great purge of all the
idol worship in the land. A few years later, he oversaw the cleansing
and repairing of the Temple. While the priests were doing this, they
discovered the book of the Law, and drew great conviction from it.

However, it was too late for the southern kingdom, and the wrath of God
was already unleashed.

Josiah died in peace before the destruction of the nation, and did not
have to witness the terrible invasion of the Babylonians.

#### Jehoiakim

Jehoiakim was an evil, idolatrous man who ruled as king during the
destruction of the nation of Judah.

He is not mentioned Matthew skips over him because of his evil and the
terrible destruction that occurred during his reign

His son Jeconiah, or Jehoiachin is mentioned by Matthew.

Mary’s Line, the Biological Line of Christ (Luke).

Note: We are taking this one all the way to Christ.

#### Nathan

Nathan was a son of David and Bathsheba. He is the quiet son, for
nothing much is said about him in Scripture. Even so, he was a link in
the biological line of Christ.

#### Mattathia

Nothing much is known about this man.

#### Menna, Melea, Eliakim, Jonam, Joseph, Judah, Simeon, Levi, Matthat, Jorim, Eliezer, Joshua, Er, Elmadam, Cosam, Addi, Melchi, Neri

Nothing is said about any of these men in the Bible.

#### Shealtiel

This is where a crossover point occurs. Both genealogies stop here. This
is where the nation went into exile. Shealtiel was not the true son of
Jeconiah, but instead, the line of David continued in this man because
Jeconiah failed to produce an heir. This is why Matthew’s genealogy
claims Jeconiah as this man’s father.

#### Zerubbabel

He is the head of Israel at the time of the return from exile. Zerubabel
is the result of the marriage between Pedaiah and the wife of Shealtiel.
Shealtiel died without leaving an heir, and so it was his brother’s
responsibility to step in for him.

1 Chron. 3:19 identifies Pedaiah as the true father, while Shealtiel was
only his wife’s first husband. The line continued.

According to the book of Ezra, this man was a key figure in the
rebuilding of the Temple He was a good man who did much for the worship
of the true God of Israel.

#### Rhesa, Joanan, Joda, Josech, Semein, Mattathias, MaathNaggai, Hesli, Nahum, Amos, Mattathias, Joseph, Jannai, Melchi, Levi, Matthat

The biological line of Christ continued in these men. Nothing else is
known of them.

#### Eli

Father of Mary.

#### Mary

From the Exile to Joseph Joseph’s Line, the Legal Line of Christ, as
Expounded in Matthew

#### Shealtiel, Zerubbabel, Abiud, Eliakim, Azor, Zadok, Achim, Eliud, Eleazar, Matthan, Jacob

Joseph, the husband of Mary and stepfather of Christ

Chronology of the Life of Christ
--------------------------------

6 B.C. The Magi from the East see the star and begin their journey to
Jerusalem.

Autumn, 6 B.C. Zacharias and Elizabeth conceive John the Baptist.

Spring, 5 B.C. Mary conceives by the Holy Spirit, and visits Elizabeth.

Summer, 5 B.C. Mary leaves Elizabeth; Joseph has a dream.

Late Summer, 5 B.C. Elizabeth gives birth to John the Baptist.

Late Autumn, 5 B.C. Mary is near term; she and Joseph are uprooted by
the census and must travel the 70+ miles from Nazareth to Bethlehem.

December, 5 B.C. Mary gives birth to Christ; the Magi arrive in
Jerusalem.

Late January Early February, 4 B.C. The presentation of Christ in the
temple.

February, 4 B.C. The Magi visit the Christ child in Bethlehem; Mary and
Joseph flee to Egypt after the warning in the dream. It is about a three
week journey 200 miles or so.

February, 4 B.C. The children of Bethlehem are killed, calculating from
the time the Magi saw the star and began their journey.

March 14, 4 B.C. Herod dies the sin unto death.

Late March, 4 B.C. Jesus, Joseph, and Mary make the trip back to
Nazareth, probably arriving in late April or early March.

April, 4 B.C. Joseph and Mary and Jesus return to Israel, settling in
Nazareth.

\*\*\*Note: the year zero does not exist!

Spring, 9 A.D. Christ’s first Passover in Jerusalem.

Spring, 26 A.D. John begins his ministry of baptism and repentance.

Autumn, 26 A.D. Christ is baptized by John, and begins His ministry.

Late Autumn Early Winter, 2627 A.D. Christ’s wilderness temptation.

December, 26 A.D. Christ’s 30th birthday.

Late Winter Early Spring, 27 A.D. Christ’s early Galilean ministry: Cana
and Capernaum.

Spring, 27 A.D. Christ’s first Passover during His ministry; first
cleansing of the temple, Nicodemus.

Mid 27 A.D. to early 28 A.D, John’s accession, Christ’s training of the
disciples, return to Galilee through Samaria, the Samaritan woman, the
continuation of the Galilean ministry.

Galilean ministry:

Child at Capernaum healed, John 4:4654.

Rejection at Nazareth, Luke 4:1631.

Recall of the four disciples, Matt 4:1822; Mark 1:1620.

The demonaic healed at the Capernaum synagogue, Mark 1:2128; Luke
4:3137.

Peter’s mother in law and others healed, Matt 8:1417; Mark 1:2934; Luke
4:3841.

Tour of Galilee with Simon and others, Matt 4:2324; Mark 1:3539; Luke
4:4244.

Final recall of the four disciples, Luke 5:111.

Cleansing of a leper and resultant publicity, Matt 8:24; Mark 1:4045;
Luke 5:1216.

Paralytic healed and forgiven, Mat 9:18; Mark 2:112; Luke 5:1726.

Matthew’s calling and banquet at his home, Matt 9:913; Mark 2:1317; Luke
5:2732.

Dispensational teaching, Mat 9:1417; Mark 2:1822; Luke 5:3339.

Spring, 28 A.D. Second Passover of Christ’s ministry.

Spring, 29 A.D. Third Passover of Christ’s ministry.

Spring, 30 A.D. Crucifixion and resurrection of Christ.

Summer, 30 A.D. Ascension and Session of Christ.

The Birth of John the Baptist
-----------------------------

This begins our study on the people who waited in the right way for
their Messiah.

We know the situation in Israel at this time; we know the history; and
we know that the Messiah is going to come. It is a great thing to look
at the lives of those who waited. In a sense we all wait for the coming
of the Lord for the Lord’s righteous activities in our own lives. It is
a fine thing to look at those who waited in the right way, and to find
out how we might wait.

**Read Luke Chapter 1**

There is a stylistic change in the Greek of this passage and the one
which follows. Luke changes from the strongly idiomatic classical Greek
to one that is quite Hebraistic. Since Luke was a Greek by birth, and
his language is very Greek, the speculation is this: that Luke records
here the memories of Mary, the mother of Jesus.

#### Introduction

**Luke 1:5-7**, “In the days of Herod, king of Judea, there was a
certain priest named Zacharias, of the division of Abijah; and he had a
wife from the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth. And they
were both righteous before God, living without blame in all the
commandments and righteous requirements of the Lord. And they had no
child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they were both advanced in
their days.”

Luke goes out of his way in his usual way to put forth the background of
these two people; their general lineage, and of more importance their
spiritual status.

They were both of the priestly tribe of Levi. This was a tribe of
prestige and prosperity and also the tribe of the Sadducees. This
religious group came into being about 300 years before Christ. They are
characterized by their aristocracy, their cultural surrender to the
Greeks and others, and their opposition to everything Pharasaic.

The name “sadducee” comes from the Aramaic ***Sadduqim***, which meant
‘righteousness’. However, those who were in opposition to them called
them ***saddiqim***, which meant ‘destruction’.

They came from the ranks of the priests and high priests of Israel,
during the time of the Greek occupation. Their desire was to give in to
the Hellenizing influences of the Greeks, and thus retain their favor.

The Sadducees had a lot to lose to the occupation forces of the Greeks,
because they were mostly prosperous, aristocratic people. In order to
maintain their lifestyles and possessions, they placated the Greeks,
giving in to their cultural and even religious influences.

Due to the double tyranny of the Pharisees and king Herod, the Sadducees
had made a great comeback not long before the birth of Christ. Let’s
face it: the Pharisees were no fun at all.

Zacharias and Elizabeth had resisted the temptation to become Sadducees,
and neither did they become Pharisees by reaction. They found a true
relationship with God through the ritual system.

They lived in all the righteous requirements and commandments of God.
The commandments included much more than the ten commandments. The
commandments definitely included the greatest commandment to love the
Lord with all their heart and soul and might.

They did so without blame. Without blame does not mean that they were
perfect. It does mean that when they sinned they took care of it with
the proper sacrifice and the mental attitude that went along with it.
Without blame does not mean that their execution of the ritual plan was
perfect they were after all human. They did their best and maintained a
good relationship with God.

Elizabeth was barren. Whenever a woman of God is barren it means that
God has something special in mind for her. The Greek word for “barren”
is STEIRA, and it definitely indicates that she was physically incapable
of bearing children.

In Elizabeth’s case, this condition was in addition to her being past
menopause. She was quite old, but this was not the reason for her barren
condition. The two are separate in the original language.

Complicating the situation was Zacharias’ advanced age. He could not
have gotten Elizabeth pregnant even if she were able.

This situation was identical to that of Abraham and Sarah, some two
thousand years before. It is worthwhile to note! The covenants to Adam,
Abraham, and David are about to be fulfilled, and this birth will bring
the messenger to prepare the way.

**Luke 1:8-10**, “Now it came about, while he was performing his
priestly service before God in the appointed order of his division,
according to the custom of the priestly office, he was chosen by lot to
enter the temple of the Lord and burn incense. And the whole multitude
of the people were in prayer outside at the hour of the incense
offering.”

There was a great number of priests. Because of this, it is likely that
each priest would get to render his service once in a lifetime. The
priests were chosen by lot to do so, and with God there are no
accidents.

As a righteous man, no doubt Zacharias had big expectations for this
day, and in some ways he may have looked at the event as the culmination
of a good life. It was Zacharias’ turn to burn incense at the incense
altar in the Holy Place.

The incense altar represented the righteousness of Jesus Christ, the
righteousness produced by His perfect life.

The incense burned twenty four hours a day a tribute to the
uninterrupted righteousness of Christ’s life. Zacharias merely went in
to put on new incense, so that the burning might be perpetuated.

The aroma that the incense gave off was designed to be a pleasing one
representative of the pleasure that Christ would give to God.

The position of the altar in that holy place showed the source of that
righteousness the Spirit and the Word. The golden lampstand was a symbol
of the ministry of the Spirit it illuminated the table of showbread. The
table of showbread represented the Word of God. When illuminated by the
Spirit it produces righteousness.

Thus the Holy place taught even the doctrine of kenosis.

The great multitude of people may indicate that there was a feast or
that this was a holy day but we can only guess at that.

Zacharias encounters a surprise…

**Luke 1:11,12** “And an angel of the Lord was seen by him, standing to
the right of the altar of incense. And when he saw this, Zacharias was
troubled and fear fell upon him.”

There is little doubt left in Zacharias’ mind that this is an angel of
the Lord. He did not think it was a practical joke; he did not wonder if
this happened to all the priests. He had an immediate reaction.

Zacharias knew that this did not happen every day. Furthermore, this
angelic being had an imposing appearance, because fear is a universal
reaction to the visible manifestation of angels. They are awesome
indeed!

The angel stood at the right hand of the altar. This is the place
reserved for Jesus Christ Luke records it because it is significant this
angel stood as a direct representative of Christ Himself.

Zacharias knows that this is a grave moment something great, and perhaps
terrible is about to happen. But he does not suspect in the least what
it is all about.

The angel speaks …

**Luke 1:13-17**, “But the angel said to him,”Do not be afraid,
Zacharias, for your petition has been heard, and your wife Elizabeth
will bear you son, and you will give him the name John. And he will be
joy and gladness to you, and many will rejoice at his birth. For he will
be great before the Lord, and he will drink no wine or liquor; and he
will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother’s womb
(birth). And he will turn around many of the sons of Israel to the Lord
their God. And he himself will go before Him in the spirit and power of
Elijah, to turn the hearts of the fathers back to the children, and the
disobedient to the attitude of the righteous; so as to prepare a people
who have been built for the Lord."

The angel has good news for Zacharias and his wife Elizabeth they are
going to have a son. The story also reveals that Zacharias had been
praying for a son he had petitioned God. Not only will they have a
child, but that child will also be joy and gladness to them. Such is not
always the case, so this must have been welcome news.

Even greater news is that even at his birth many will rejoice, and that
he will be great before the Lord. He will be different in that he will
be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother’s womb.

The first part of the verse makes it clear that he will be great in his
relationship with the Lord. ***ENO.PION*** is a preposition which
denotes face to face relationship. John will have that kind of
relationship.

Second, there is the matter of John’s abstinence from alcoholic
beverages. This also probably indicated that he would refrain from
social life.

Finally, John is filled with the Spirit from birth. The preposition
***EK***indicates separation, and this case, separation from the womb.
This preposition may indicate source the origin of something from
someplace, but even so, the separation is now effective. It is no longer
there at the place of its origin. EK does not indicate the existence of
one thing inside another.

There is no precedence for interpreting this preposition to mean ‘from
inside’, as is often done.

The adverb ***ETI*** is the key here. This together with ***EK***
translates “ever since.” The Liddell-Scott lexicon makes this very clear
on p.703. ETI does have some flexibility it can be taken in the
ascensive meaning, which shows surprise on the part of the writer. It
strengthens the phrase in which it takes part.

It was surprising that an infant would be filled with the Spirit from
birth. Often this is interpreted as being in the womb because of verse
41 in this same chapter. Verse 41 in no way indicates that the fetus was
filled with the Spirit in the womb. In fact, it is quite clear that it
is Elizabeth who is filled, as we shall see.

With the ministry of the Spirit upon him, John will turn the hearts of
the fathers back to the children, and the disobedient to the attitude of
the righteous; so as to prepare a people built for the Lord.

It had been quite some time since a prophet had ministered in the nation
of Israel. There had been many false prophets, but not a single true
one. The gift had gone out from the people. Now the fullness of time had
come, and with it a prophet to proclaim the coming of the Messiah. The
people must be humble; they must be obedient; they must be built inside
their own souls.

Humility precedes obedience.

Knowledge precedes obedience.

Zacharias’ failure and his discipline

**Luke 1:18-23**, “And Zacharias said to the angel, ‘How shall I know
this for certain? For I am an old man, and my wife is advanced in
years.’ And the angel answered and said to him, ‘I am Gabriel, who
stands in the presence of God; and I have been sent to speak to you, and
to bring you this good news. And behold, you will be silent and unable
to speak until the day when these things take place, because you did not
believe my words, which shall be fulfilled in their proper time.’ And
the people were waiting for Zacharias, and were wondering at his delay
in the temple. But when he came out, he was unable to speak to them; and
they realized that he had seen a vision in the temple; and he kept
making signs to them, and remained mute. And it came about, when the
days of his priestly service were ended, that he went back home.”

Zacharias in the Holy Place in front of the archangel Gabriel, the very
messenger of God wants proof!

All this time he has prayed for an heir. All this time he has done the
right thing. But when push comes to shove, Zacharias fails to believe.
He and his wife are too old, he thinks, for God to work a miracle.

The angel Gabriel is mentioned in three other passages in the Bible.

-   When he appears to Mary, to announce her role in the Messiah’s
    birth.

-   And twice in Daniel, 8:16 and 9:21, to interpret the Word of God.

-   Not only does this angelic being have an awesome presence, but he is
    also one of the highest ranking of all angels, if not the highest.

The angel refers to his duty, his rank, and his mission. His regular
duty station is in the presence of God. He is an angelic attendant in
God’s throne room, and he is often sent as God’s personal messenger.

Now, all elect angels were and are trustworthy, but Gabriel is likely
the most trusted of all. The wise king always uses his best men as his
messengers; the wise general his best as couriers. So it is with
Gabriel. His mission was as a messenger, sent personally by God to
communicate the good news of the birth of the one who would follow.

Because of Zacharias’ unbelief, he is disciplined to be silent. As
Gabriel was a messenger to him, so also he could have been a messenger
to the great crowd of people who were outside. He could have had the
honor of the first announcement of the coming Messiah. Instead, he is
silenced. Silenced until the day of the birth of his son. We will
contrast this with the response of Mary.

Zacharias comes out of the Holy Place; and there arrayed before him is a
great crowd, all of whom were wondering why it took so long for him to
do his duties.

Now comes the charades routine. Zacharias makes signs he tries to make
them understand the message, but they just cannot understand him. They
come to the conclusion that he has seen some kind of vision and they
most likely wrote it off as another kook.

Zacharias goes home when his duties are over. We know from a later
passage that he uses the time to become childlike in his humility, and
to turn his heart to a righteous attitude. He builds himself up in the
Lord, until he develops a proper response. When he finally opens his
mouth good things come forth.

Elizabeth conceives …

**Luke 1:24,25**, “And after these days Elizabeth his wife became
pregnant; and she kept herself in seclusion for five months, saying, ‘So
this is what the Lord has done to me in the days when he looked to
remove my disgrace among men.’”

Elizabeth makes an expression of disgust here not of praise. She is
living in seclusion, not excited to be a part of God’s plan for the
Messiah, but ashamed to even go out. It is going to take a visit from
Mary to get her out of her funk.

#### Elizabeth Gives Birth to the Forerunner

**Luke 1:57-66**

Remember, Mary had gone back home, leaving Elizabeth to fend for
herself. Elizabeth had fully recovered from her funk over conceiving at
such an advanced age. She gave birth to a son, and many of her neighbors
and relatives heard about it, and so they rejoiced over the birth of
this child, fulfilling the prophecy of Gabriel.

It is funny to note that people make signs to him when he is not deaf,
only unable to talk. Zacharias names the boy John, and immediately his
tongue is freed, and immediately he speaks praise to God. He had had
nine months in which to contemplate his earlier failure. He recovered
and now says the most wonderful things. The local population is
astonished at these events, and they wonder what the child will grow up
to be. A prophet? The Messiah himself? There was a lot of serious
thinking going on the subject.

#### Zacharias’ Prophecy

**Luke 1:67-69**. And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy
Spirit, and prophesied, saying: ’Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for
He has visited us and accomplished redemption for His people, and has
raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of David His servant
as He spoke by the mouth of His holy prophets from of old Salvation from
our enemies, and from the hand of all who hate us; to show mercy toward
our fathers, and to remember His holy covenant, the oath which He swore
to Abraham our father, to grant us that we, being delivered from the
hand of our enemies, might serve Him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before Him all our days. And you, child, will be called
the prophet of the Most High; for you will go on before the Lord to
prepare His way; to give to His people the knowledge of salvation by the
forgiveness of their sins, because of the tender mercy of our God, with
which the Sunrise from on high shall visit us, to shine upon those who
sit in darkness and the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way
of peace.;"

Zacharias concentrates on the cross first. Zacharias realized the need
for salvation, and that it had to come before any national independence
or prosperity.

Then he talks of national freedom from oppression. He calls to mind the
covenant of God, the Abrahamic covenant. He brings up the fact that
peace gives one the opportunity to concentrate on God all the more.

John is the one who will prepare the way for the savior, to make smooth
the path for him. He is to get people to the point where they can handle
the ministry of our Lord.

Christ’s ministry will be hard to swallow, because it is about a
personal redemption that requires humility. The people of Israel wanted
national redemption without the sacrifice of individual pride. John will
preach the message of salvation and forgiveness of sins.

Zacharias concentrates on the mercy of God, because Christ is the
visible manifestation of mercy to all mankind. The Sunrise from on high
is a term that is used to denote the resurrected status of Jesus Christ.

-   anatole means sunrise in the sense of the rising again of the sun in
    the east. ana is a preposition which means both up and again.

-   When you add the term from on high, it is obvious that this is God.

-   So, Zacharias looks forward to the manifest mercy of God in the
    person and work of Jesus Christ, especially concentrating on the
    resurrection.

-   The sunrise shines upon those who are in darkness and the shadow of
    death.

-   Darkness refers to the cosmic system of Satan his design to prevent
    us from believing in Christ, and to destroy our relationship with
    God.

-   The shadow of death refers to physical death.

The light guides us into the way of peace (prosperity).

#### John the Baptist’s Childhood

**Luke 1:80**, “And the child continued to grow, and to become strong in
spirit, and he lived in the deserts until the day of his public
appearance to Israel.”

The Song of Mary
----------------

### Introduction

Luke’s narrative now turns to the story of Mary, the mother of our Lord.

Note: there is no Biblical support for the practice of Mariolatry. Mary
is clearly portrayed as the biological mother of Jesus Christ. There was
nothing special about her makeup that she was the mother of our Lord
nothing that made her unique from all other women. She was a woman who
loved God, and she too waited for the Messiah. In fact she waited
faithfully, unlike so many of her contemporaries, both women and men.

However, to make Mary someone to worship is completely wrong. Mary was
born into sin, like every other female child before and after her. She
does not have special access to God just because she conceived and gave
birth to Christ. She is no different as far as we are concerned than any
other mature believer. Christ Himself warns against Mariolatry in Luke
11:2728.

### The Arrival of an Angel.

**Luke 1:26-28**, “Now in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was went
from God to a city in Galilee, called Nazareth, to a virgin engaged to a
man whose name was Joseph, of the descendants of David; and the virgin’s
name was Mary. And coming in, he said to her, ‘Hail, woman who has been
graced out. (kecharitomene) The Lord is with you.’”

Again, here is the angel Gabriel, the messenger of God, one of the
highest ranking of all the angels. He is sent to announce to Mary the
imminent arrival of the Messiah. Of the genealogies of these two, we
already know much. Repetition is not necessary.

As the angel “beams in”, he issues a greeting to her. The greeting means
literally, “woman who has been graced out”. God is the only subject ever
used by ***CHARITOO***.

#### A Conversation with an Angel, Luke 1:29-38

Notice that Mary is not fazed at all by Gabriel’s angelic appearance.
She is unique in this regard. Daniel trembles, Zacharias fears, the
shepherds are terribly frightened, and Mary is troubled by the greeting
of this angel! She begins to DIALOGEI in her own mind. She is thinking
it through, having a dialogue with herself “What did this angel mean by
his greeting?” She was troubled by it.

The angel alleviates her troubled mind and tells her the exact meaning
of the greeting.

“You have found grace from the side of God.” Let me quote from Bauer,
Arndt, and Gingrich: “…denotes a person, and indicates that something
proceeds from this person.” Mary has found it because she looked for it.
She is a wonderful believer from the age of Israel. In her great
humility she cannot think that she has found grace, for she has already
prospered in knowing God.

“You will conceive in your womb and bear a child.”

This certainly would have come as a surprise, since Mary was a virgin.
She certainly understood the consequences of what the angel was saying.
She would be subject to disgrace, and maybe the risk of capital
punishment. There are great and terrible implications to this.

“And you will name Him Jesus.” His name means salvation.

“He will be great, and will be called the Son of the Most High; and the
Lord God will give Him the throne of His father David; and he will reign
over the house of Jacob forever; and kingdom will have no end.”

There could be no mistaking it now. She was to be the mother of the
Messiah. He is the Son of God he will sit on David’s throne his kingdom
will last forever his kingdom will know no boundaries. These are all
very clear. She is to bear the Messiah.

Mary’s response is simple “How will this come about, since I am a
virgin?” Mary’s response is not arrogant, unlike that of Zacharias. She
is just curious. She did know the basics of reproduction. In fact, it is
my impression that the Hebrew society was much more open about such
things than our own. She was more than willing to believe.

Gabriel tells her as best he can the specifics on how she will conceive.
“The Holy Spirit will appear over you, and the power of the most high
will overshadow you; and therefore the holy one who is born will be
called the Son of God.”

This is the essence of the virgin birth. It is really quite clinical in
nature. God the Holy Spirit performs the operation by his omnipotence,
and adds the unpolluted chromosomes to Mary’s ovum.

#### The Two Mothers are United

**Luke 1:39-45**, “Now at this time Mary arose and went with haste to
the hill country, to a city of Judah, and entered the house of Zacharias
and greeted Elizabeth. And it came about that when Elizabeth heard
Mary’s greeting, the fetus leaped in her womb; and Elizabeth was filled
with the Holy Spirit. And she cried out with a loud voice, and said,
‘Blessed among women are you, and blessed is the fruit of your womb! And
how has it happened to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
For behold, when the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the fetus
leaped in my womb for joy. And blessed is she who believed that there
would be a fulfillment of what had been spoken to her by the Lord.’”

We are not sure why Mary got up and went ‘with haste’ to visit Elizabeth
at least the text does not come right out and tell us. However, we do
know that Elizabeth is in a funk over the timing of her pregnancy. She
does not want to be a circus sideshow act she wanted children while she
was still young.

We also know that Mary and Elizabeth were cousins, so it was likely that
Mary knew both of Elizabeth’s pregnancy and her mental state. Finally,
we know that as soon as she know about her own immaculate conception,
she left to be with Elizabeth.

Therefore, it is likely that the combination of the above conditions led
Mary to visit Elizabeth. Just as soon as Mary enters the house and
speaks her greeting, just as soon as that greeting enters the ears of
Elizabeth, the fetus leaps in her womb. This leaping was reflex motility
in response to the excitement of Elizabeth on hearing the voice of her
cousin.

Immediately Elizabeth is filled with the Holy Spirit. This is for the
purpose of prophecy what she says next is inspired by God the Holy
Spirit. Luke always does us the courtesy of telling us when one is under
the filling of the Spirit. Elizabeth literally “sounds off with a great
cry” ANEPHO.NE.SEN KRAUGE. MEGALE. and she says, “Blessed are you among
women and blessed is the fruit of your womb.”

This first part of what she says confirms that when she wants to talk
about a human being she uses one expression. Mary is blessed because she
is chosen to bear and nourish and raise the Son of God. The fruit of her
womb (not yet ripe nor picked) will also be blessed, because of His life
and death.

The word for blessing here is EULOGEO, which means to speak well of
someone. EULOGEO is blessing with reference to reputation.

Furthermore, Elizabeth says, “and why does this happen to me, that the
mother of my Lord should come to me?” Elizabeth employs a rhetorical
question here. She does not expect an answer she knows it. Elizabeth
knows that the child she will bear will prepare the way for Christ. She
answers her own question in the next verse.

Elizabeth now gives an explanation of her previous words, “for behold,
as the sound of your greeting came into may ears, the fetus in my womb
leaped for joy.”

Elizabeth explains to Mary her rhetorical question, and her statement
about blessing. She is telling Mary that at the moment she heard her
greeting (and at the moment she was filled with the Spirit) the child
leaped in her womb. It all came together at that moment Elizabeth
understood everything Mary the greeting her own pregnancy God’s plan for
the ages.

Finally, Elizabeth summarizes the entire experience the lifetime of that
moment, “and blessed is she who believed that the things that were
spoken will be fulfilled in her by the Lord.”

Elizabeth is telling us that she finally understands it all, and she is
complementing Mary on her immediate belief in the word of God. The word
for blessing here is different from the one above. This is macharia, or
mental attitude contentedness. Elizabeth is saying in a roundabout way
that she missed the boat that she did not immediately respond as she
should have, and so she missed the blessing.

The important thing is that Elizabeth now understands everything with
clarity. This verse also answers the previous question why Mary came to
visit Elizabeth. It was so that Elizabeth could recognize her own error,
and turn around.

#### Mary’s Song, Luke 1:46-56

This is the great prayer of worship from Mary. It is a prayer that is
based on the utter confidence of one who has known and relied on the
capabilities of God.

Let’s look at what Mary knows about God from learning in the ritual plan
of God. She knows the architecture of her own soul that she has emotion,
mentality, and a human spirit. She knows that God is the source of her
salvation. She calls Him her savior. She understands the omnipresence
and omniscience of God when she says that “He considered” her humble
state.

EPIBLEPO is the verb here, and it means to look down upon something, and
to understand it. God looked down upon Mary and He fully understood her
humble state. God also knew exactly what to do about it. That is the
expression of his omniscience.

Mary understands the omnipotence of God she calls Him the Mighty One,
and she knows exactly what God has accomplished.

She understands the perfection, or holiness of God. When she says, “Holy
is His name”, she says, perfect is his essence.

She understands the implications of the birth of the Messiah. She
praises God for the strategic victory of the angelic conflict, and here
is her reasoning. If God can accomplish the virgin conception and birth
of the Messiah, He can accomplish anything else. What is the problem to
go from one impossibility to the next.

Mary was a patriot, and she understood the implications of the Messiah
on her nation. She related the Messiah to the kingdom of God, and indeed
she already understood some of the kingdom concepts even before Christ
ever explained them.

She understood the difference between being rich and poor. This metaphor
has nothing to do with food or hunger in the literal sense. It has
everything to do with a desire for a relationship with God. It is all
about true humility.

Those who are humble and hungry for a relationship with God will receive
the intrinsically good. Those who are rich in their own minds will go
away empty handed.

Mary understood the mercy of God, and its implications. She knew the
history of her nation and its heroes.

The Birth of Christ
-------------------

### Joseph Has a Dream.

**Matt 1:18-25**, “Now the birth of Jesus Christ was as follows. When
His mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph, before their union, she
was found holding in her womb from the Holy Spirit. Now Joseph her
husband, being a righteous man and not wanting to publicly expose her,
desired to divorce her in secret. But when he had considered these
things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him during a dream,
saying, ‘Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take along Mary as
your wife; for that which was conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
And she will bear a Son; and you will call His name Jesus, for He
Himself will save His people from their sins.’ Now this whole thing came
about that what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet might be
fulfilled, saying, ‘Behold, the virgin will hold in her womb, and will
bear a Son, and they will call His name Immanuel’, which having been
translated is, ‘God with us’. And Joseph arose from his sleep, and did
as the angel of the Lord commanded him, and took her as his wife, and he
did not know her until she gave birth to a Son; and he called His name
Jesus.”

Matthew is a Jew, and he writes his gospel to Jews. He is very careful
in how he says things, for he does not want his readers to stumble over
his words. His hypersensitive Jewish readership would have stumbled
often and missed the message with a Gentile author writing in the style
and words of the unclean.

Matthew is the one who emphasizes the kingdom offer more so than the
other Gospel writers. He desires for the Jews to know their error in
rejecting the Messiah and His kingdom.

I have provided a very literal translation, because it is important to
understand the exact words of Matthew, and of the angel.

It was the Jewish custom to become engaged, and then have the marriage
and its consummation one year later. It was during this one year period
that Mary conceived by the Holy Spirit. Remember that she had gone away
and visited with Elizabeth immediately after the immaculate conception.
Since she stayed with Elizabeth for several months, Mary’s pregnant
state would have been quite obvious when she returned.

The Greek says, “EURETHE EN GASTRI ECHOUSA EK PNEUMATOS HAGIOU.” This is
translated, “she was found holding in her womb from the Holy Spirit”.

Joseph either did not know or did not believe the last part that about
the Holy Spirit. If Mary did tell him this, it probably seemed too far
fetched for him to buy. The literal translation is correct the word for
child does not appear in Matthew’s text.

He could have used BREPHOS or PAIDEIA or TEKNON, but he did not. Instead
he uses a term which is quite clinical. The aorist participle ECHOUSA is
quite clear it simply communicates that her state came about previously,
and that she was holding something, not a baby, not a child, but
something in her womb. ek plus the ablative of source of PNEUMATOS
HAGIOU shows very clearly that although she was pregnant from the Holy
Spirit, no sexual relations were involved.

Joseph was a righteous man, and he did not want Mary to suffer public
disgrace because of her pregnant state.

The aorist infinitive of DEIGMATIZO paints the picture of one pointing
out another. Usually the context is one of disgrace. The public disgrace
may have been deadly for Mary, because the Mosaic Law demanded capital
punishment for adultery, Deut 22:2327.

Joseph considered these things and came to a decision. This is all
described by the verb ENTHUMEOMAI. ENTHUMEOMAI had the idea of
smoldering incense, and it often portrayed the angry thoughts of an
individual. Joseph does a slow burn over this, and manages no small
amount of self control when he decides to put her away privately.

An angel of the Lord (unidentified) appears to Joseph during a dream.
The word for dream here is ONAR. In another time and another place a
very similar thing happened, and this becomes a marvelous play on words.
ONAR is a very ancient Greek Word, and remained uncorrupted even to
Matthew’s day.

ONARION, a word with virtually the same spelling is the word for "little
donkey’. When Balaam went out to betray the nation of Israel, an angel
of the Lord stood in his way with a drawn sword. Balaam’s donkey, on
which he was riding, saw the angel and stopped. Balaam did not see the
angel. So the donkey talked to Balaam because of Divine inspiration.
Balaam then saw the angel, and his effort to betray the nation was
thwarted.

In same way, Joseph is out to betray the nation, and the entire world,
when he desires to divorce Mary. His divorce of her would confirm to the
world that she did have sexual relations with a man, and conceived from
that liaison. So an angel is sent to stop Joseph in a dream.

The angel tells Joseph that he should not be afraid to take Mary along
as a wife. The word PARALAMBANO is a terrific picture of marriage. It
means to take someone or something along with you. When the man takes
his wife, he takes her along with her on a lifelong journey.

The angel also makes a clear communication on the contents of Mary’s
womb. The angel uses the neuter singular definite article as a relative
pronoun to describe what is in her. It is translated “that which”, or
“the thing”. It is clear to the angel, a superior and righteous being,
that what is in Mary’s womb is not yet human life.

In the next sentence the angel says TEXETAI HUION, “she will give birth
to a son”. Notice that it is at the time of birth that the contents of
her womb is identified as a son.

Look at the message of the angel “and you will call his name Jesus
(savior), because He Himself will save His people from their sins”. The
angel did not emphasize the Messiah political savior aspect of Christ’s
life, but His role as the Savior from sin.

This was a part of Matthew’s mission to show that Christ did succeed.

This whole thing took place so that Isaiah 7:14 might be fulfilled.
“Behold, a virgin is pregnant, and brings forth a child.” The Hebrew
does not say that she is ‘with child’. It says pregnant, and there is a
difference.

They will call His name Emmanuel, which having been translated is ‘God
is with us.’ The Greek preposition for with is META, which means ‘with’
in the sense of relationship. It denotes a close relationship between
two persons. So Joseph rises from his sleep and does as the angel
commanded. He took Mary along as his wife.

An important detail is included at the end of this passage. Joseph did
not know Mary until after she gave birth. Knowing her is a polite way of
saying that he refrained from having sexual relations with her. She was
definitely a virgin when she gave birth, and Matthew confirms it.

Footnote: He does “know” her afterwards, and they produced several
children together. Mary is not a perpetual virgin.

The Night Before Christmas
--------------------------

On the night before Christmas, God gave Christ the authority to
establish His kingdom on earth.

**Daniel 7:13,14**, “I did behold in the night visions, and look! There
came with the clouds of heaven one like the Son of Man; and he came to
the Ancient of days, and was presented before Him. And to Him was given
dominion and honor and a kingdom, that all peoples, nations, and
languages should serve Him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion
which shall not pass away and his kingdom one that shall not be
destroyed.”

The setting of this verse is before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. It
cannot occur at any time during the incarnation, because such would
violate the tenet of kenosis as spelled out in Phil 2:58.

It could not have occurred during the three days before the
resurrection, because John 3:35 indicates that Christ had already
received the authority from God, and this was some three years before.

Daniel also gives the purpose of the kingdom as a universal service of
Christ. Therefore this giving must have taken place before Christ even
offered His kingdom to the Jews. With kenosis, that leaves only a time
before the incarnation.

Although the timing of the passage in the chapter seems to be after the
judgment of the Great White Throne, which Daniel’s vision reveals in
verses ten and eleven, verse twelve is the decisive verse.

Verses ten and eleven clearly stand at the Great White Throne and beyond
into the eternal state, as confirmed by Daniel 12:1 and Revelation
20:1115. Verse twelve, however, jumps back to the first three beasts of
Daniel 7:46. There are four beasts in the chapter. The fourth one is the
beast of the tribulation, destroyed by the return of Christ.

In each case the beasts are metaphors that illustrate nations or groups
of nations, Daniel 7:17, “These great beasts, which are four in number,
are four kings who will arise from the earth.”

The first three are nations after Daniel, yet before the incarnation.
They are somewhat parallel with the parts of the statue in chapter two.

“The first was like a lion and had the wings of an eagle. I kept looking
until its wings were plucked, and it was lifted up from the ground and
made to stand on two feet like a man; a human mind also was given to
it.” This is Persia.

“And behold, another beast, a second one, resembling a bear. And it was
raised up on one side, and three ribs were in its mouth between its
teeth; and thus they said to it, ‘Arise, devour much meat!’” This is
Greece.

“After this I kept looking, and behold, another one, like a leopard,
which had on its back four wings of a bird; the beast also had four
heads, and dominion was given it.” This is Rome.

Since these are just before the incarnation, and the fourth beast is
tribulational, and since the giving of authority took place before the
incarnation, we can place the time of verse 13 and 14 at the night
before Christmas with confidence.

Daniel’s curiosity concentrates on the fourth beast, the one of the
tribulation, v.19. Also, notice that the passage skips over the
intercalation of the church age. The four beasts are consecutive in the
passage.

What happened on that night before Christmas?

Christ came with the clouds. These clouds are elect angels, attending
Jesus Christ.

Christ came to heaven from earth, where He functioned as the angel of
Yahweh.

He approached the throne of God, and was presented to Him. The
presenting official or officials are not mentioned by name. For this
occasion we can place Michael, the archangel here. Perhaps also Gabriel,
the kings’ herald is also involved.

God, the Ancient of days (a reference to His eternal nature), gives
Christ dominion, honor, and a kingdom. Dominion is authority to rule.
This is specific authority to rule over planet earth.

-   The first Adam surrendered that authority with his sin of abrogation
    of responsibility. He gave up the earth to be like the woman in sin.

-   The last Adam, Jesus Christ, came to earth to retake that authority.

-   However, in order to exert His authority, Christ must have the
    assent of the ruled. This He has yet to get.

-   The dominion is everlasting Christ will never relinquish it.

-   Honor is the respect that makes one fit to rule.

-   Authority without respect is ineffective. Whereas authority is
    nominative, honor must be earned.

-   There is a difference between authority and moral authority. Moral
    authority is the true right to rule. The Greek word exousia
    describes moral authority.

-   This is given to Christ by God through the Word and the ministry of
    God the Holy Spirit. On two occasions, God would express His
    pleasure with the moral authority of Christ: at His baptism, and at
    the transfiguration.

Then there is the kingdom itself.

-   The purpose of the kingdom is for the unification of all peoples of
    the earth in service to Him.

-   This is the millennial kingdom of Jesus Christ. It was given at this
    moment, and stands waiting for His people.

-   This kingdom is everlasting, and cannot be destroyed.

And in a moment’s time, Christ left.

**Philippians 2:5-8**, “Have this attitude in yourselves which was also
in Christ Jesus, who, although He existed in the form of God, did not
regard equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied Himself,
taking the form of a bondservant, and being made in the likeness of men.
And being found in appearance as a man, He humbled Himself by becoming
obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross.”

The motive was love God wanted the very best for sinful and unattractive
mankind.

**John 3:16**, “For God loved the world so much that He gave His
uniquely born Son, so that everyone who believes in Him might not
perish, but have eternal life.”

At the next moment, Christ was born, the perfect God-man.

**Luke 2:8-14**

At Christ’s baptism, God expressed His pleasure in Christ and told all
those present of Christ’s moral authority.

**Luke 3:22**, “And the Holy Spirit descended upon Him in bodily form
like a dove, and a voice came out of heaven, ‘Thou art My beloved Son,
in Thee I am well pleased.’”

A few weeks later, John the Baptist reflected on the great presentation
on the night before Christmas.

**John 3:35**, “The Father loves the Son and has given all things into
His hand.”

Another stamp of approval came before the inner circle of the disciples.

**Matthew 17:1-5,** “And six days later Jesus took with Him Peter and
James and john his brother, and brought them up to a high mountain by
themselves. And He was transfigured before them; and his face shone like
the sun, and His garments became as white as light. And behold, Moses
and Elijah appeared to them, talking with Him. And Peter answered and
said to Jesus, ‘Lord, it is good for us to be here; if you wish, I will
make three tabernacles here, on for You, and one for Moses, and one for
Elijah.’ While he was still speaking behold, a bright cloud overshadowed
them; and behold, a voice out of the cloud, saying, ‘This is My beloved
Son, with whom I am well pleased; listen to Him!’”

No matter the response of Israel, Christ had to die for sin, and He knew
it.

**Luke 22:41,42**, “And He withdrew from them about a stone’s throw, and
He knelt down and began to pray, saying, ‘Father, if Thou art willing,
remove this cup from Me; yet not My will, but thine be done.’”

The climax of the Divine sacrifice came at the end of the ordeal on the
cross.

**Matthew 27:46,49**, “And about the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a
loud voice, saying, ‘Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?’ that is, ‘My God, My
God, why did you forsake me?’ And Jesus cried out again with a loud
voice, and yielded up His spirit.”

Paul introduced his epistle to the Romans in this way:

**Romans 1:1-3**, “Paul, a bondservant of Christ Jesus, called as an
apostle, set apart for the gospel of God, which He promised beforehand
through His prophets in the holy Scriptures, concerning His Son, who was
born of a descendant of David according to the flesh, who was declared
the Son of God with power by the resurrection from the dead, according
to the spirit of holiness, Jesus Christ our Lord.”

After the resurrection Christ reminded His disciples of His authority.

**Matthew 28:18-20**, “And Jesus arrived and spoke to them, saying,”All
authority was given to me in heaven and on earth. Therefore, as you go,
disciple [teach with authority] all the nations, baptizing them into the
name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, teaching them to
keep everything I have commanded you. And behold, I myself am with you
all days until the conclusion of the age."

But He also reminded them that the time for His kingdom had not yet
arrived.

**Acts 1:6,7**, “And so when they had come together, they were asking
Him, saying, ‘Lord, is it at this time You are restoring the kingdom to
Israel?’ He said to them, ‘It is not for you to know times or epochs
which the Father has fixed by His own authority.’”

But that time is set in the decree, and will surely occur.

**Revelation 1:7**, “Behold, He is coming with the clouds, and every eye
will see him, even those who pierced Him; and all the tribes of the
earth will mourn over Him. Even so. Amen.”

The beginning of Christ’s kingdom will be dramatic, and we will be there
to see it all.

**Revelation 19:11-16**, “And I saw heaven opened; and behold, a white
horse, and He who sat upon it is called Faithful and True; and in
righteousness He judges and wages war. And His eyes are a flame of fire,
and upon His head are many diadems; and he has a name written upon Him
which no one knows except Himself. And he is clothed with a robe dipped
in blood; and His name is called the Word of God. And the armies which
are in heaven, clothed in fine linen, white and clean, were following
Him on white horses. And from His mouth comes a sharp sword, so that
with it He may smite the nations; and He will rule them with a rod of
iron; and He treads the wine press of the fierce wrath of God, the
Almighty. And on His robe and on His thigh He has a name written, ’KING
OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.”

Christ and the Shepherds
------------------------

**Luke 2:8-20**, “And some shepherds in the same region there were
bivouacking and diligently keeping guard over their flock by night. And
an angel of the Lord suddenly stood before them, and the glory of the
Lord shone around them, and they were afraid with great fear. And the
angel said to them, ‘Do not be afraid; for behold, I am announcing to
you good news of a great joy which will be for all the people; because
there was born for you today in the city of David a Savior, who is
Christ the Lord. And this is the sign for you: you will find a baby
wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger.’ And all of a sudden there was
together with the angel a multitude of the heavenly army praising God,
and saying, ‘Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace among
respectable men.’ And it came about after the angels had gone from them
into heaven, that the shepherds were saying to one another, ‘Let us go
straight to Bethlehem then, and let us see this event that has happened
which the Lord has made known to us.’ And they came in haste and found
their way to Mary and Joseph and the baby laying in the manger. Now
seeing this, they made known the statement which had been spoken them
concerning this Child. And all who heard wondered at the things which
were told them by the shepherds. And Mary treasured all these matters,
pondering them in her heart. And the shepherds returned, glorifying and
praising God over all that they had heard and seen, just as it had been
told to them.”

Greek notes.

The shepherds were “AGRAULOUNTES” bivouacking, or staying outside
overnight. It is from the noun AGORA, which means outside, and the noun
AULAZOMAI, which means to lodge, or stay away from home.

While they were there, they PHULASSONTES PHULAKAS, which is a very
strong way to say that they kept guard.

It was in this same region that David watched over his flocks. It was in
this same region that the temple flocks were kept. We cannot confirm it,
but it may be that these shepherds watched the temple flocks.

The angel of the Lord EPESTE., which literally means to stand over
someone. The glory of the Lord shone around them. This is described by
the verb PERILAMPO.

Angels are apparently beings manufactured from light, and thus they
produce the glory of the Lord. This is the awe inspiring thing that so
often causes great fear.

The shepherds were EPHOBE.THE.SAN PHOBON MEGAN. Afraid with great fear.

The angel EUAGGELIZOMAI the word from which we get the English
evangelize. The herald of the king is announcing His arrival. First the
angel makes it very clear that this is great news a great joy for all
the people. Then he describes the news in detail. It is important to
note that the angel concentrates on Christ as the savior. The herald of
the king of kings and Lord of Lords directs his listeners to the mission
of the first advent, which is redemption of the soul.

The sign which will reveal the truth of the matter to the shepherds is
unique. A baby wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger. This is why
Christ had to be born in a stable, and why there was no room at the inn.
Because it would provide a unique setting which could be used as a sign
of the veracity of God. If one is true, the sign, then the other is true
as well, the savior.

The verb EXAIPHNE.S means literally out of a sudden. Our English ‘all of
a sudden’ works also.

The multitude of the heavenly army is PLE.THOS STRATIAS OURANIOU, and it
is literally an army. They appeared to angels, praising God and saying
specific things. These things were recorded by Luke in the form of
verse, so they may indeed have been singing a song.

They praise God first, worshipping Him for what He has accomplished in
the birth of Christ. Second, they give a message of good will to men on
earth. They wish peace [eirene] to respectable men. The word for
respectable is eudokias, which means to think well of someone. It is
literally “well thought of men”.

The angels leave, and so the shepherds have a brief discussion among
themselves as to what they should do. It is a decisive and quick meeting
They say, “let us go through immediately to Bethlehem” DIELTHO.MEN DE.
HEO.S. In the English, Let’s go straight to Bethlehem. The syntax
suggests that this is an urgent and repetitive meeting. They recognize
clearly that the Lord made known to them this event, and so they take
off in haste [SPEUDO] and search and find [ANEURISKO] the stable where
the Christ child lies.

The first thing that the shepherds do when they arrive is recount the
events of the evening to Joseph and Mary, and everyone there (apparently
there were others) wondered at the things which were told them. Mary
treasured [SUNTEREO] these things in her heart, putting them together
[SUMBALLO] in her heart.

Mary was thinking about these things, and throwing them together so that
she had a full understanding of the events of the last few months. She
treasured these things they were precious to her, because she knew that
her savior was born.

The shepherds had to get back to their flocks, but they left glorifying
and praising God over everything which they heard and seen, just as it
was spoken to them. Their worship is directed toward the veracity of
God, and there is two levels to this veracity, one of which is not
mentioned. The first level is the immediate, obvious one. The events of
the night fulfilled what had been spoken to them by the angel. The
second level is that everything spoken by the prophets of old,
everything in the Mosaic Law, was now coming to pass on this night.

These shepherds no doubt had a great sense of destiny before the angel
ever came that night. They watched over flocks near the city of David’s
birth, and near where David himself shepherded. Therefore, when the
chief shepherd arrived, they knew the implications. They were shepherds
in the region of the temple flocks.

We cannot be completely sure if their flock was the flock, but even if
they were only near, they would have known much about the temple flock,
and they would have been acquainted with the temple flock shepherds.

The lamb of God was born that night, and everything in the ritual system
was fulfilled in that baby in the manger. Everything that they knew of
the ritual system would have come to mind as the angels appeared, and as
they rushed to the stable, and as they saw the fulfillment of the sign.

It was what the shepherds knew beforehand that gave meaning to the
events of that night. It was especially appropriate that the shepherds
should come to see the chief shepherd and the lamb of God in that baby
that night. And they went away glorifying God, because what they knew
before went together with what they knew now.

The Davidic, Mosaic, and Abrahamic covenants were all fulfilled in
Christ, and the shepherds knew it.

### Lessons from the Passage

The quality of our worship is directly related to the amount of Bible
Truth that we understand in our hearts. This was true for both Mary and
the Shepherds. It is very clear that Mary understands the significance
of the birth of her child. Because of this, she treasures those
significant things in her heart.

The shepherds worshipped, not because they were neophytes to the faith,
but because they had waited faithfully for the Messiah, and knew God
already. This is the interpretation which best explains their actions.
The shepherds were quite willing to go check out the sign which the
angel had provided. They glorify God even as the angels had done just a
little while before when the army of heaven was visible to them.

Therefore, the more you know of Bible Truth, the greater your worship
and praise of God will be, for God is the author, and the Bible is the
mind of Christ. The more you know of Bible Truth, the greater
appreciation you will have of the grace of God as it is revealed in the
events of your life.

You cannot interpret the events of your life in the right way without
the truth. When you do have the truth, the events of your life have
meaning.

There is more to this life than the visible there is an invisible realm
which is far more important, and which adds meaning and importance to
our own visible lives.

The angels rejoiced on that night for what God had accomplished in the
birth of Christ. That the elect angels rejoiced gives us an indication
of the mood in the enemies’ camp on that very same night. It must have
been gloomy indeed. Insofar as we take part in the invisible realm of
conflict, we add meaning and importance to our lives in the same
measure.

God reveals Himself in the first advent His grace and power are revealed
in the birth of Christ.

-   Through the virgin pregnancy and birth.

-   Through the birth of John the Baptist.

-   Through the child in the manger.

-   Through the minds and hearts of those who were prepared for the
    first advent of Jesus Christ.

This advent had to do with the redemption of sins.

The Circumcision and Presentation of Christ
-------------------------------------------

**Luke 2:21-38**

Christ was circumcised according to the decree of the Law. Circumcision
was the ritual performed on male babies on the eighth day of their life.
It included the cutting away of the foreskin of a child, and a few words
spoken in remembrance.

The ritual recalled the first circumcision, which was Abraham. It was a
ritual which represented the cutting away of the scar tissue on
Abraham’s soul, and his advance to maturity. So every Jewish male child
was circumcised after the pattern of their forbear, to remind them of
the importance of spiritual growth.

**Romans 2:25-29**, “For indeed circumcision is of value if you practice
the Law; but if you are a transgressor of the Law, your circumcision has
become uncircumcision. So if the uncircumcised man keeps the
requirements of the Law, will not his uncircumcision be regarded as
circumcision? And he who is physically uncircumcised, if he keeps the
Law, will he not judge you who though having the letter of the Law and
circumcision are a transgressor of the Law? For he is not a Jew who is
one outwardly, nor is circumcision that which is outward in the flesh.
But he is a Jew who is one inwardly; and circumcision is that which is
of the heart, by the Spirit, not by the letter; and his praise is not
from men, but from God.”

Christ fulfilled the Law to represent that He too as a man would have to
grow up spiritually. Indeed he would.

**Luke 2:22-24**, “And when the days were fulfilled for their
purification according to the Law of Moses, they brought Him up into
Jerusalem to present Him to the Lord, just as it has been written the
Law of the Lord, ‘Every first born male that opens the womb will be
called holy to the Lord.’ and to offer a sacrifice according to what was
said in the law of the Lord, ‘A Pair of turtledoves, or two young
pigeons.’”

The reference for the purification of the woman is:

**Leviticus 12:2-8**, “When a woman gives birth and bears a male child,
then she shall be unclean for seven days, as in the days of here
menstruation she shall be unclean. On the eighth day the flesh of his
foreskin shall be circumcised. Then she shall remain in the blood of her
purification for thirty-three days; she shall not touch any consecrated
thing, nor enter the sanctuary until the days of her purification are
completed. But if she bears a female child, then she shall be unclean
for two weeks, as in her menstruation; and she shall remain in the blood
of her purification for sixty-six days. When the days of here
purification are completed, for a son or for a daughter, she shall bring
to the priest at the doorway of the tent of meeting a one year old lamb
for a burnt offering and a young pigeon or a turtledove for a sin
offering. Then he shall offer it before the Lord and make atonement for
her, and she shall be cleansed from the flow of her blood. This is the
law for her who bears a child, whether a male or a female. But if she
cannot afford a lamb, then she shall take two turtledoves or two young
pigeons, the one for a burnt offering and the other for a sin offering;
and the priest shall make atonement for her, and she will be clean.”

The woman’s purification had a practical function related to health and
hygiene; but there is also a representation here related to original
sin.

The purification of the male child begins with a Sabbath period, and
commemorates the original creation of man. That purification then
continues for thirty-three more days, for a total of forty. Forty was
the number of purification from sin by means of doctrine forty days and
forty nights of the flood; forty years in the wilderness. So there is
circumcision for spiritual growth and forty days for purification by it.

The female child required fourteen days for the first period of
purification, representing her place as second in creation or perhaps it
took two Sabbaths to adore the woman. Then sixty six more days for a
total of eighty, a double wilderness experience for her.

That Joseph and Mary gave the two turtledoves or pigeons in place of the
lamb tells of their financial station in life: they were quite poor.

The burnt offering and the sin offering were related to the imputation
of the righteousness of Christ and Adam’s sin respectively. They
commemorated the first born in such a way as to call to mind the
Passover, and thus the work of Christ. Exodus 13:1.

The Passover is recorded in Exodus chapter 12.

The firstborn’s holiness comes directly from the firstborn of God, Jesus
Christ. Everything was done properly with regard to Jesus Christ, even
though He did not require it. The propriety of these acts was quite
poignant, and even ironic.

#### Luke 2:25-35

So they came to the temple for Christ’s dedication and Mary’s
purification. Simeon and Anna and others were there in the temple.
Apparently they were part of a regular crowd that was faithful to God
and waited for the true Messiah. Both of these people were old, and yet
they remained faithful to God even in their old age.

Simeon was righteous, DIKAIOS, and well receiving, EULABES. The latter
means that he had true humility, a predisposition to obey. PROSDECHOMAI
means to wait for some event. It could as easily describe waiting for
the bus as for the Messiah. But Simeon is waiting for the encouragement
of Israel. PARAKLESIS is a word which means to call someone alongside,
as in getting a lawyer, or other kinds of help. It was used for the role
of the Messiah. So Simeon is waiting unconcernedly for the Messiah,
because he has received word from God.

The pluperfect periphrastic construction is EN and the perfect
participle of CHREMATIZO. The latter verb describes the naming of an
heir in a Roman adoption ceremony. CHREMA means money, so there is a
kind of Christmas connection here.

There is great emphasis on the perfect aspect of this construction, so
it concentrates on the irrevocability of this action by God.

So Simeon has been irrevocably told that he will not die before he sees
the Messiah, and so in spite of his advanced age he is waiting for Him
just as though he was waiting for the bus.

This is certainly the way to wait for Christ’s return, which is the
rapture. Not by checking your watch every five minutes. The rapture will
occur it has been promised. But we know neither the day nor the hour; it
is hidden even from Christ.

Simeon is deeply moved by the event, and utters a prayer of
thanksgiving, knowing that his life was complete with this event. He
asks God to die, a remarkable request indeed. He has done his duty and
he has seen what was promised. He calls God a DESPOTA, a lord or master
of property. The DESPOTA is a ship’s captain. He sees God as the owner
of the earth.

The reason for this unusual request is that he has seen the salvation of
God. This distinction is made because many were calling themselves God’s
salvation, but only one was it.

Many call themselves God’s salvation even today Buddha, Mohammed, and so
on. But there is only one true God man, and that is Jesus Christ. And
this provision of salvation is distributed to each individual face to
all humanity. The distributive use of KATA with the noun PROSOPON
indicates all this. It portrays both the whole of humanity and every
individual face in it.

Simeon furthers this idea by saying that the child is a light of
revelation to the Gentiles and the glory of Israel. The Gentiles are the
unbelievers of Simeon’s world; Christ reveals God. Christ is the glory
of Israel He is their crown and greatest child, the fulfillment of all
the promise of Abraham, Moses, and David.

And to Mary alone Simeon says something pretty hard…

The child is appointed for the fall and rise of many. PTOSIN means fall,
and it describes the violent fall of a person in their death, or the
violent destruction of a house or building. The Christ child is
appointed for the violent end of many He will judge all of humanity.
ANASTASIN means rise from the prone position, or even resurrection.
Christ is appointed for the resurrection of many.

All of humanity falls into these two categories. You will either fall
because of your unbelief and meet the final violent end of eternity in
the Lake of Fire, or you will rise because of your belief and receive a
resurrection unto eternity in Heaven.

Simeon continues giving the reason for the appointment of Christ with a
statement even about Mary herself.

He calls it a corresponding sign, a SEMEION ANTILEGOMENON. Christ is
appointed for something corresponding with regard to Mary; corresponding
to what has just been said. ANTI mean ‘face to face’ when in compound
verbs, so this is ‘speak face to face.’ The idea is that this sign
speaks face to face with what has already been said. It does not
necessarily contradict it though, and it does not here.

The ROMPHAIA was the heavy broadsword of the Thracians. They used it
from horseback with devastating results to the human body. Simeon says a
ROMPHAIA will pass through the very soul of Mary. The verb DIERCHOMAI
means to ‘pass completely through’ something. The idea is that wielding
the heavy sword from horseback causes it to pass completely through the
body of the enemy.

Well, this is the sword of the Spirit passing completely through the
soul of Mary, and exiting. It is the sword of inspiration.

**Hebrews 4:12,**“For the word of God is living and operational and
sharper than any two-edged sword and piercing between the soul and the
spirit, joints and marrow, and is the critic of the thoughts and intents
of the heart.”

Several other verses shed light on this statement:

**Ephesians 6:17**, “And take the sword of the Spirit, which is the word
of God.”

But especially Revelation, which has the ROMPHAIA in a prominent place.

**Revelation 1:16**, “In His right hand He held seven stars, and out of
His mouth came a sharp two-edged sword; and His face was like the sun
shining in its strength.”

**Revelation 2:12**, “And to the angel of the church of Pergamum write:
The One who has the sharp two-edged sword says this…”

**Revelation 2:16**, “Therefore repent; or else I am coming to you
quickly, and I will make war against them with the word of My mouth.

**Revelation 19:15**, “From His mouth comes a sharp sword, so that with
it He may strike down the nations, and He will rule them with a rod of
iron; and He treads the wine press of the fierce wrath of God, the
Almighty.”

**Revelation 19:21**, “And the rest were killed with the sword which
came from the mouth of Him who sat on the horse, and all the birds were
filled with their flesh.”

So the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, the sharp
two-edged sword of the mouth of Jesus Christ will pass through Mary.
This will result in the revelation of the reasoning of many hearts. The
word of God reveals the reasoning of your heart. It is the critic of the
thoughts and intents of the heart. This is portrayed as an event yet
future, so that it is not a reference to the virgin pregnancy.

This must be a function of inspiration through her. God the Holy Spirit
will inspire her so that she says or writes something that is the
measure of thought for many hearts. Since the famous magnificat is
already passed, it is not likely just that, although Simeon could
indicate that what she has said will be employed to reveal the thoughts
of many.

To this end, Mary did say “He has scattered those who were proud in the
thoughts of their heart.” However this is not a very exact fit for what
Simeon says.

Although Mary makes an occasional appearance in the gospel narratives,
nothing comes close to fit the bill of this great announcement.

Acts 1:14 is the last official mention of Mary in the Bible: “These all
with one mind were continually devoting themselves to prayer, along with
the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with His brothers.”

John 19:27 reports that after the crucifixion she lived in the home of
John, and yet he mentions her not at all. Mary was likely in her mid to
late forties at the time of the death of her son; she may have lived
quite long after that.

From Luke’s narrative of the nativity of Christ there is some evidence
that he has access to Mary. This may well be her legacy that was
prophesied by Simeon.

There is no possibility that this statement could lead one to believe in
Mariolatry. Participation in inspiration, yes. But we do not worship the
writers of the New Testament.

An intriguing possibility exists with Mary as the author of the letter
to the Hebrews. Unfortunately, there is just not enough evidence to make
a definitive assertion at this time.

#### Luke 2:36-38

Anna had been a widow for some fifty or sixty years. She lived a life
dedicated to service in the temple with fastings and prayers. Just as
Simeon is speaking with Mary, Anna walks up and begins to thank God, and
preaches to everyone there on that day.

Notice that she preaches to an exclusive group those who are looking for
the redemption of Israel. This was a very mature woman, and there is
little doubt that these faithful, Simeon and Anna knew one another. You
can envision Anna glancing over at Simeon as he performs this ritual,
and then she sees the light of his face and she knows. She knows!

The nativity story teaches a couple of important lessons.

That God is immanent; that is, He intervenes in the lives of men. This
is perhaps the greatest lesson of our lives.

Immanence on the part of God requires responsibility on our part. If God
is not responsible for His creation, which is the assertion of deist
belief, then man is not responsible to God. But God’s intervention puts
responsibility squarely in our laps. God therefore requires of us
certain things:

-   He requires us to depend on His grace for salvation.

-   If He did not intervene in our lives, then we would have to produce
    our own salvation.

-   He requires us to depend on Him for our post salvation glorification
    of Him. It is His grace which accomplishes our achievements in the
    post salvation plan.

-   Grace, and not works is the general rule because of the
    interventionist attitude of God.

This is why the birth of the Messiah was so very meaningful to men like
Simeon and women like Anna. They were relieved to see a visible
manifestation of grace and know that they were not responsible for
providing their own salvation. You see Simeon say that it is the Lord’s
salvation, and not his.

Apart from spiritual responsibility, there is a logistical
responsibility to provide for ourselves. This is one of the implications
of the fall. It is grace and not works. So that with immanence there is
an implicit trust in God. This has a profound effect on personal belief
and even political philosophy.

The second lesson is imminence, and that is a philosophy of waiting.

Simeon and others had an understanding that the first advent was
imminent. Not that it would occur right away, but that it would occur
because God had promised it.

Although God has made no such promise with regard to the rapture, that
is, that it will occur in our lifetimes, it is an event promised by God,
and we are to wait as graciously as Simeon did.

And even if we are not fortunate enough to see the rapture, the ends of
our lives are imminent; they may happen at any time.

Living in that imminent state of mind has its impact as well. You can
take no vacation from the plan of God. You can make no assumption that
you will have plenty of time to grow later. God has already set the date
for your end, and you may die at forty.

Therefore do not say to yourself that you will really concentrate on
spiritual growth after you raise your children or establish financial
security or some other distraction in life. That can be a truly crucial
mistake in the arrangement of your priorities.

The Visit of the Magi
---------------------

#### Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh.

**Matt. 2:1-12**

This passage records the doings of the magi from the east. There are
some things that we do not know about them. We do not know their country
of origin. We do not know how many there were. The number three comes
from the number of different gifts given to Christ. We are not aware of
their royal status they are never called kings.

What is significant is their humility, especially as compared to that of
the spiritual leaders of Israel. The spiritual leaders of Israel knew
where the child would be born, but they did not go. The Gentile magi did
not know where he was to be born, but they found out and went.

Also significant in this passage is the beginning of Herod’s scheme to
kill the child. Herod wants to know the exact time at which the star of
the Magi appeared. He instructs the Magi to search thoroughly for the
child. He gives as his reason his desire to worship the child as well.
Herod is an evil man, jealous of any who would take his throne.

He was worse than a Gentile; he was a half Jewish Idumaean, a descendant
of Esau, a wild desert dwelling type. The Jews considered them with no
small amount of prejudice. To make matters worse, Herod was hardly a
model human being. He has been called a monster one who was crafty and
cruel, jealous and vain and always quick to seek revenge when wronged.

He came to the throne over the Roman province of Judea through cunning
and manipulation of Marc Antony.

He had nine or ten wives. Even the historians lost count after a while.

On the smallest of suspicion he had even his favorite wife, Mariamne,
put to death, along with her sons Alexander and Aristobulus.

Even while on his own deathbed, just days before he died he had his own
son, his flesh and blood Antipater put to death. Caesar Augustus was
heard to say, “It is better to be Herod’s hog than his own son!”

Again at his deathbed he ordered all the principle men in Israel to be
rounded up and placed in the local stadium, where they could be
surrounded by his soldiers and then slain when he died. The reason: so
that there would be great mourning at his death.

Herod tried bribing the Jews, so that they would like him, and he could
view himself as a successful ruler.

Julius Caesar had given Herod a fantastic and truly royal inaugural
celebration back in 37 BC, when Herod took the throne. He always longed
for that past glory, when in fact the traditional Roman warning of “sic
transit gloria mundi” applied to him more than any other.

The bribes came in the form of a building program that was the very
rival of Solomon’s. He built monuments and buildings in the Holy Land,
and even rebuilt their temple in magnificent fashion, topping it with a
golden dome. Other buildings and monuments were undertaken: a temple, a
forum, and a theater at Samaria, a great Greco-Roman capital, a temple,
and port at Caesarea.

The port was an engineering marvel that even today is remarked upon by
the archaeologists who work at the site. Luxurious palaces and fortified
retreats were built at Masada, Jerusalem, Jericho, and Herodium, which
was near Bethlehem.

In Jerusalem he had baths, a theater, and a Hippodrome constructed. He
also promoted Greek and Roman games so that the people might be
entertained.

All of these things struck a sour note as any bribe to a slave will. The
people really did not want these things. They wanted to be autonomous
and free. But in order to be truly free, any people must know God, and
that was exactly the problem in Israel.

But what is really significant about this passage is the gifts of the
Magi.

Gold was appropriate, since it represented royalty. It did so even in
the ritual system of Israel it represented exactly that. It also
represented deity.

Frankincense was burned on the incense altar in the Temple. It
represented the righteousness of Christ.

Myrrh was used to scent the oil that burned in the golden lampstand of
Israel. It was also used to embalm the dead.

These Magi brought the gifts which perfectly portrayed Jesus Christ from
the viewpoint of the ritual system, and they were not even Jews! You can
see why God led them to Bethlehem. It was entirely appropriate that they
should do so, since the Jews would reject Him. This hearkens forward to
the church age.

The Flight To Egypt and Return to Israel
----------------------------------------

#### Matt 2:13-23

The magi had been in Jerusalem to ask about the location of the Messiah.
They figured they could find the information at the capital city.

Since Bethlehem was just five miles from Jerusalem, it was just a couple
of hours by foot. Herod had instructed the magi to find the Christ
child, so that he could worship him, too. Of course this was a lie.
Herod was jealous, irrational, and probably demon possessed. Herod
wanted to kill Christ. Because of the short distance between Jerusalem
and Bethlehem, Herod would have expected an answer the next day or
evening at the latest.

The magi came and worshipped the child, and then returned to their
country by a different route. This would have given Joseph and Mary no
time at all to prepare for the long journey to Egypt. It was more than
200 miles, and with a child just a few weeks old.

Joseph and Mary knew that their child was the Messiah, and they were
experienced by now with angelic communication. This was no time to
quibble they left that very same night.

Joseph and Mary and their child stayed in Egypt until the end of Herod,
probably not more than a month.

Matthew is a great recorder of prophecy. Since he wrote his gospel to
the Jews, he was always on the lookout for ways in which he could prove
that Christ truly was the Messiah.

For this event, Matthew draws on Hosea 11:1, which records the call of
Israel from Egypt. The historical event was the Exodus of Israel under
the guidance of Moses. The wilderness journey was an event which was
celebrated in the three annual feasts. The Jews were constantly reminded
of the events of that journey, because it was a great analogy for their
spiritual lives and their national heritage.

The passover and the feast of unleavened bread reminded them of the
beginning of their journey and salvation.

The Pentecost reminded them of the law giving at Mt. Sinai, and the
importance of the Word in their spiritual lives.

The feast of tabernacles reminded them of their failure in the desert.

The historical event of the Exodus also stood as a prophecy pertaining
to the life of Christ. The call is facilitated by an angel, and through
Christ’s parents. It is interesting to note that Hosea substitutes ‘son’
for ‘Israel’, the king for his subjects. Just as Israel would have its
beginning in Egypt, so also would their king, Jesus Christ. This was
another great reason to believe in Christ as the Messiah.

Herod understood [IDO.N] that he had been tricked by the magi. They
never came back, and so he assumed that they were making fun of him,
ridiculing him [EMPAIZO]. In reality, the magi simply obeyed the word of
the angel which guided them, but Herod took the thing as a dirty trick.
The word emphasizes Herod’s perception of the event.

Because of his perception of the event, Herod was very enraged.

The word for rage here is ETHUMO.THE., which is similar to Joseph’s
anger at hearing about the pregnancy of marriage. There, the word was
enthumeomai, or inward anger. Joseph did a slow burn.

Here, the word is modified by the adverb LIAN, which strongly magnifies
the emotion. Herod does a fast and violent burn.

Herod’s anger, together with his jealousy for the Messiah, made him a
virtual humanization of the devil himself.

This would motivate him to murder all the male children, two years old
and under, in and around Bethlehem.

The number of children was not all that many by holocaust standards.
There probably were not much more than twenty or so.

The word for murder is ANAIREO, which means to snatch away violently. It
is a Greek word for illegitimate killing.

Herod had little information on the child Messiah, and that is why he
calculated [E.KRIBO.SEN] the age of the child as 2 years or less.

The magi had seen the star some two years before, and so he assumed that
the child may have been born then. Of course, we understand that Christ
was only six or eight weeks old at the time, but Herod did not know
that. That is why he was so liberal in his murderous decree.

Herod sent [APOSTELLO] to have the children killed. He was a powerful
man, and he had others do the dirty work for him.

Again, a prophecy is fulfilled here, and Matthew is kind enough to
record it. Jeremiah 31:15 finds its fulfillment here.

The prophecy there has to do with the exile of the southern kingdom of
Judah.

Ramah was just to the north of Jerusalem, and on the exile route to
Babylon. It was a high place, and it was here that it was likely that
the children and the aged who would not be able to make the journey
would be killed.

There was great weeping that day by the women of Judah.

Rachel was the wife of Jacob (Israel), and so she came to represent the
women of God’s chosen nation.

And now Bethlehem is another Ramah. Bethlehem also was a city on a hill,
just like Ramah to the north. Ramah meant ‘height’ or ‘high place’. And
Bethlehem is a place where children are murdered. The women are crying
out loud, and mourning for their children. This is the kind of hard
grief, where you do not want someone around you, because it is so very
painful.

This is the record of the return of Joseph and Mary and Christ to
Israel.

Joseph was guided in two ways: first, to return to Israel, and second to
avoid the region of Judea and to go north to Nazareth. The immediate
reason to go to Nazareth was to avoid Herod’s son, Archelaus. The act of
avoidance fulfilled another prophecy concerning the Messiah.

Herod did not last much more than a few weeks after his murder of the
children in and around Bethlehem.

His death went like this: (ugly people die ugly deaths)

When it was apparent that he was going to die, and even Herod understood
that he was on his own deathbed, he ordered that his own son, Antipater
to be slain for no good reason.

Just a day or two later, he ordered that all the principle men of the
nation be gathered in the hippodrome (horse racetrack) and surrounded by
soldiers.

These soldiers were ordered to kill these men when he died, so that
there would be much mourning in the land at the time of his death. The
order was never carried out.

Archelaus was also anti-Semitic, and during his reign he would slaughter
thousands of Jews, until he was deposed and exiled to Vienna, where he
died.

The death of the children around Bethlehem caused an uproar, and since
Jesus, Joseph, and Mary left at night and in a hurry, it was probably
assumed that Jesus died there as well, since they never returned to
Bethlehem.

Up until this point, there had been a lot of hoopla over the birth of
Christ and John the Baptist. They were already mini-celebrities.

The assumed death of Christ allowed Him to grow up in Nazareth in a
quiet way, without the bother of the masses, and without other
satanically inspired attempts on His life.

The Early Life of Christ
------------------------

**Luke 2:40** “Now the child was growing and being made strong being
filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon Him.”

The noun PAIDION describes Christ. It depicts a child from the viewpoint
of trainability. This stage began when the child was eight days old, and
continued until adulthood (which was the early teens at the time).

The first two verbs describe the early life of Christ:

-   EUXANEN is from AUXANO, which means to grow. It is in the imperfect
    tense, which portrays a past action occurring over a duration of
    time. This is in the active voice, which portrays the child as the
    source of the action. It is a reference to the physical growth of
    Christ’s body. Since this verb is often used to describe the growth
    of plant life, you could loosely translate this “He grew like a
    weed.”

-   EKRATAIOUTO is from KRATAIOO., which means to strengthen, or
    empower. It is in the passive voice showing that the child did not
    produce this action. This verb is in the imperfect tense, showing
    the past action over a duration of time. This is a reference to the
    spiritual growth of Christ.

The idea of Christ’s spiritual growth is further strengthened by the
modal participle PLE.ROUMENON.

-   A modal participle reveals the manner in which the action of the
    main verb occurs.

-   This participle shows that the strengthening of Christ occurred
    through His filling with wisdom.

-   The participle is in the present tense, so its action occurs at the
    same time as the action of the strengthening.

-   The basic meaning of PLEROO is “to fill to the point of
    overflowing”. It leaves no part of the vessel unfilled.

The substance of the filling is SOPHIA, or wisdom. SOPHIA is applied
truth; truth that has become a real part of the person’s life not just a
theory but much more an application. Christ was made strong, being
filled with wisdom.

A final note is made about Christ’s childhood: “and the grace of God was
upon Him.”

-   The preposition EPI plus the accusative of the personal pronoun AUTO
    portrays a motion that reaches its goal completely. It shows that
    the grace of God completely reached its goal in Jesus Christ.

-   During the childhood of Christ, the grace of God fully attained its
    goal in Him. It reached its maximum potential through His
    appropriation of it. Even as a child, Christ was perfect.

General principles of Jewish child raising during the time of Christ.

Since a child was renamed a PAIDIA at eight days of age, it revealed
their attitude that children were to be trained from the youngest stage
of infancy.

The religious education of children began as soon as they could speak.
The child’s earliest vocabulary included doctrinal terms. This early
religious education was done by the mother more often than not. Of
course, our Lord could not have found a greater teacher than his own
mother she was a great believer. Instruction in the Law fell to the
father of the house it was his duty to instruct the children in the
keeping of the Law.

The schooling of children was almost exclusively religious by nature.
General education and vocational training came later. This religious
training took place in the local synagogue under the tutelage of a
Rabbi. The purpose of these schools was as follows (Edersheim, pp.
231232):

-   to keep children from all contact with vice;

-   to train them in humility, even when the bitterest wrong had been
    received;

-   to show sin in its repulsiveness, rather than to terrify by its
    consequences;

-   to train to strict truthfulness;

-   to avoid all that might lead to disagreeable or indelicate thoughts;

-   to do all this without showing partiality, without either undue
    severity, or laxity of discipline, and with judicious increase of
    study and work with careful attention to thoroughness in acquiring
    knowledge.

Until age ten the Bible was exclusively the textbook, from ten to
fifteen the Mishnah, which was the traditional oral teachings of the
Jews. It was largely philosophical by nature. Its equivalent would be
systematic theology.

After age fifteen the young man could divert his studies to vocation or
continue with his higher religious education. This determination was
made on the basis of the aptitude of the individual.

Perhaps because of the strong Pharasaic influence, the first book
studied by children was Leviticus, the laws and ordinances for Israel’s
spiritual and national life.

The home was the seat of the ritual.

-   Many times each day the child was reminded of the importance of
    God’s Word through the mezuzah, which was attached to the door frame
    of every Jewish home. This device held a small parchment the outside
    of which was inscribed with the name of God. On the inside was
    written Deut 6:49 and 11:1321. The Jews would touch the mezuzah
    every time they passed the threshold, and then kiss the fingers that
    touched it as a reminder of the importance of application.

-   Every sabbath there were preparations made by the family to remind
    them of their responsibility in relationship with God.

The yearly schedule of feasts was a great aide in teaching the character
and plan of God. Since it was on a yearly schedule the level of
inculcation was high. Think about our holiday schedule.

It is clear from Christ’s ministry that He knew the Old Testament far
better than any of His peers.

Remember from our dispensational constants two things:

-   That spiritual growth is always through faith perception and testing
    through adversity and prosperity. This is exactly how Christ grew
    strong. That he was being filled with wisdom meant that the
    perception and inculcation had to take place beforehand.

-   That the character and sufficiency of God are always the issue. And
    so they were for Christ during His childhood. Imitation of God’s
    character and reliance on Him are the very essence of SOPHIA.

The Event at the Temple
-----------------------

#### Luke 2:41-50.

[Translations the author’s from the Greek]

**Luke 2:41**, “And every year His parents used to go into Jerusalem for
the feast of Passover.”

This verse sets the stage for the story to follow. It shows the custom
of Joseph’s family with reference to the Passover feast.

The preposition KATA plus the accusative of HETOS means “every year”.

The customary imperfect of the verb POREUOMAI is translated, “used to
go”

The dative case of the noun HEORTE.S shows the reason for their annual
trip to Jerusalem the passover feast.

As a matter of fact, it was the custom for all Jewish men over the age
of twelve to do so. That Mary went when she was not required revealed
her devout nature. The child Jesus was apparently left behind with
friends or relatives until he was old enough to go.

**Luke 2:42,43**, “And when he became twelve, they went up according to
the custom of the feast, and upon their return after the full number of
days, Jesus the boy stayed in Jerusalem but His parents did not know
it.”

More attendant circumstances to the main story are related in these two
verses. They actually form one sentence in the Greek. The style of the
sentence is quite dramatic. The crucial details are withheld until the
very end.

The first phrase determines the time of this episode: the culminative
aorist of GINOMAI shows that twelve years in the life of Christ had
already past. He was actually twelve and a few months. This was to be
the first passover of the child.

-   Remember, Herod is dead, and the events of the nativity are now
    twelve years past.

-   The excitement of the nativity is long past, obscured by the present
    sufferings of the nation.

The next phrase tells us that this year was no different than the
others. They went up according to the custom of the feast. the verb
ANABAINO is put into participle form, and this is a genitive absolute.
It makes a parenthetical statement that gives necessary details, but the
genitive absolute communicates that the details are not vital to the
story. Luke is simply telling us an extra detail that is not really
vital. “when they were returning from the feast (they went up first)”
would be a good way to communicate this.

Next Luke says that Christ’s parents were returning after the full
number of days.

It was allowable for many to leave the feast before its completion if
they had a ways to travel. The most important parts of the celebration
were early in the week, so many families took advantage of the ‘getaway’
days. (Easter vacation at school). Joseph’s family did not do this.

The full number of days is TELEIO.SANTO.N TAS HE.MERAS in the Greek. The
participle is used in the temporal sense to show that they left long
after many others. They stayed for the full feast regardless of the
inconvenience, ostensibly to gain its full benefit. The aorist
participle shows that they stayed the full number of days before they
returned.

Luke next tells the real story: that Christ remained in Jerusalem while
his parents left for Nazareth, and they did not know about it.

The articular infinitive HUPOSTREPHEIN with the preposition EN shows
that it is during their return that they did not know that their son was
with them.

The constantive aorist tense of the verb HUPOMENO describes Christ’s
decision to remain. It summarizes his entire stay into one whole.

Luke also makes it clear that Jesus is still just a boy by adding the
word PAIS. He desires to remind us of this to show how extraordinary
this boy was.

Under normal circumstances good parents would keep a close eye on their
twelve year old son when they were on a trip.

Verse 44 heightens the drama, revealing the mistake of Jesus’ parents
and their action to rectify it.

**Luke 2:44**, “Now assuming him to be in the caravan they went for a
day’s journey they were seeking him among relatives and acquaintances.”

The aorist participle nomisantes shows their wrong assumption, which
preceded their wrong action. The action of an aorist participle precedes
that of the main verb, which shows them looking for Him in the caravan
as it went along. nomizo is a verb which reveals thinking that is still
in the theory stage. Joseph and Mary’s theory is that Jesus is in the
caravan, en to sunodia.

-   As many as two hundred thousand people would go up to Jerusalem for
    the feast. Great caravans with thousands of people would leave
    together for mutual protection since the roads were relatively
    unsafe.

-   With so many people, it would be easy for one to get lost or not be
    seen for a while.

-   Joseph and Mary trusted their son implicitly. Besides, he had just
    come of age by going to his first passover. He was now considered a
    man, wasn’t he?

It was their decision to go along for a day’s journey and seek for their
son in the caravan. It would take at least a day to search thoroughly
among so many people.

The word used for seek is the imperfect tense of ANAZE.TEO, which means
to search for a fugitive or an escaped slave. The addition of the
preposition ana onto the regular verb shows a great intensity of action.

They look among their relatives, and “known ones”, or more properly,
“acquaintances.” They figure that the boy will be with someone they know
are related to. Maybe he is with John, the son of Elizabeth and
Zacharias, who would also have been at his first passover that year.
Maybe with James and John the sons of Zebedee or Simon who would be
called the Zealot. All of those families were most likely there, being
devout and from the North.

**Luke 2:45**, “and not finding they returned to Jerusalem seeking him.”

So far, one day of searching has passed, and still no Jesus.

The subjective negative adverb ME. is used to denote their failure. It
allows the element of doubt in the matter. They did not find him, but
neither were they sure that he was not with the caravan. Nevertheless,
the percentages now lie with Jerusalem, and so they return.

The aorist tense of the participle HEURONTES confirms that their failure
to find Jesus preceded their decision to return to Jerusalem.

Again the verb ANAZE.TEO is used to describe their desperate search for
their son. Israel at this time was not the safest of places, and they
had already come so close to losing their son right after he was born.
These things no doubt heightened their fears.

In verse 46, Luke narrates the reunion of the child and his parents.

**Luke 2:46**, “and it came about after three days they found him in the
temple sitting in the midst of the teachers and listening to them and
questioning them.”

The three day period is significant, very significant. The exact Greek
phrase is META HE.MERAS TREIS it shows the completion of three full
days. This is used elsewhere in Scripture as a prediction of the amount
of time that Christ’s body would spend in the tomb.

**Mat 12:40**, “for just as Jonah was three days and three nights in the
belly of the sea monster, so shall the Son of Man be three days and
three nights in the heart of the earth.”

**Mk 8:31**, “And he began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer
many things and be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the
scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again.”

**John 2:19**, “Jesus answered and said to them, ‘Destroy this temple,
and in three days I will raise it up.’”

Mary, after Christ’s death some twenty two years later, would recall
this event. How clear it must have been to her that while Christ was
gone He was about the things of the Father.

At the passover, 30 A.D. Christ would die and His body would lie in the
tomb for three days and nights. During that time His soul would be
attending to the Father’s business, making the great proclamation
TETELESTAI to the fallen angels in prison under the earth, 1 Pet 3:19.

It is clear that Luke interviewed Mary or someone close to her in order
to learn of this episode in the life of Christ. The information could
not have come from any other source.

The days lay out as follows:

-   Day one: Joseph and Mary stay in the caravan and search for Him as
    they travel north.

-   Day two: travel back to Jerusalem.

-   Day three: search in Jerusalem.

-   Day four: find Christ in the temple.

The circumstantial participle KATHEZOMENON shows the circumstances in
which they found their Son sitting EN MESO TO.N DIDASKALO.N ‘in the
midst of the teachers’. didaskalon denotes a teacher with authority, an
expert in the study of the Mosaic Law. This and the following two
participles are in the present tense, indicating that all this was going
on at the moment that his parents found him.

Two other circumstantial participles spell out what Jesus was doing
while he sat.

-   AKOUONTA AUTO.N listening to them. The genitive case of auto.n
    indicates that He listened with humility.

-   EPERO.TO.NTA AUTOUS questioning them. EPERO.TO.NTA portrays a very
    intense questioning. Here not in the sense of aggressiveness, but in
    the depth and detail of the questions themselves. That the student
    should interrogate the teachers is a remarkable thing in itself!

In His humanity our Lord still had much to learn. Up to this point he
had learned all that he possibly could, but there was more to go with
each passing moment. Remember that in the incarnation the deity and thus
the omnipresence and omniscience of Christ is completely restricted.

Christ in his humanity was finite and limited in what he could know and
apply. The creature is always finite.

Verse 47 reveals the response of the teachers to the knowledge of
Christ.

**Luke 2:47**, “Now everyone who heard him was astonished by his
perspicacity and his answers.”

This comment seems to be an aside to the drama of Christ being lost and
then found by his parents, but in a way it is the real story. This is a
mile marker in Christ’s young life it gives us a brief check on his
ability to perceive and apply the truth.

First is the response of the hearers: they EXISTANTO “were astounded.”

-   Usually amazement is short-lived; a surprise hits, the amazement
    comes, and then it is gone as quickly as it came. Not so here. The
    imperfect tense of EXISTE.ME shows that the boy’s listeners were in
    a constant state of amazement.

-   EXISTE.MI means to stand outside of oneself. It shows that you are
    beside yourself with surprise, amazement, etc. It is even used to
    show a state of befuddlement or even psychosis. Luke makes a joke
    here: Christ’s listeners are stunned to the point of unthinking
    about His thinking!

The object of the teachers’ amazement is twofold.

-   The SUNESIS of Christ. This summarizes His perceptive ability with
    reference to spiritual matters. In essence it reveals the function
    of Jesus’ human spirit. It is definitely a function of the heart the
    kind of thinking that immediately precedes application. Naturally
    this includes belief. This understanding only comes from the grace
    of God, and not the power of man, Eph. 3:4 and 2 Tim 2:7.

-   His answers, described by the word APOKRISESIN. Interestingly
    enough, this word comes from a compound which literally means ‘from
    the source of judgment’.

-   Of course, the teachers cannot see our Lord’s thought processes, but
    they can listen to His answers. From his answers they deduce His
    fantastic thought processes.

**Luke 2:48**, “and seeing him they were thunderstruck and his mother
said to him,”Child [TEKNON] why have treated [done] us in this manner?
Behold your father and I searched for you in torment."

To begin with, the astonishment of Joseph and Mary is not due to the
spiritual discussion which is going on as they arrive. They are amazed
that they have found him at all they were at the point of giving up. If
they were amazed in the same manner as the teachers, their response
would have been in that category. There is a certain agony in finding
that which is lost, even when it is found intact. Joseph and Mary
experience just such an emotion.

Mary is the one who speaks. Joseph may have spoken but it is not
recorded here. She definitely rebukes her son, but that rebuke is
definitely wrong.

She calls him TEKNON this is not a term of respect it is the neutral
child appellation, but it has no reference to authority. Mary assumes
that her child is wrong because of the way that she suffered.

Mary adds an adverb to describe their mental attitude during the search
ODUNO.MENOI. This is the present passive participle of ODUNO.MAO., which
functions as an adverb to describe their mental attitude. The search was
full of doubt and mental agony. The verb literally describes the agony
that comes from burning. They were out of fellowship while they were
searching.

Parents: there will be times when you agonize over your children. Your
attitude is your responsibility, regardless of what your children do.
Whatever your children do, right or wrong, your bad attitude is your
fault, and never, ever theirs.

Verse 49 gives Christ’s reply to the accusation of his mother.

**Luke 2:49**, “and he said to them,”Why were you seeking me? Did you
not know that it is necessary for me to be about the things of my
Father?"

First there is a legitimate question. ‘Why were you seeking me?’ It is
wonderful to notice that he does not judge his parents. He does not use
the compound verb for the desperate search, nor does he use the
adverbial participle for mental torment. He asks why they searched for
him at all, when they should have known all along where he was. Christ
uses the objective negative adverb OUK to indicate that there is no
doubt that they should have looked at the temple first.

Although they assumed [NOMIZO] him to be in the caravan, they should
have assumed him to be in the things of the father.

EN TOIS TOU PATROS MOU should be translated ‘about the things of my
father.’ Not ‘in my father’s house’. The word OIKOS [house] is not in
the text.

The word DEI describes the higher calling of the boy. It shows a moral
necessity for him to be about the things of his father. The things of
the father have to do with faith perception of the truth also consistent
with verse 40 and its record of Christ’s childhood of wisdom.

This is the first indication of Christ’s self-awareness of His essence
and mission in life. It is likely that He knew it long before this, but
this is our indicator of its existence at age 12.

From at least age 12 Christ was aware that he was the son of God. It is
also apparent that it was necessary for Him to upgrade his education by
speaking with the teachers at the temple.

Joseph and Mary’s response to Christ’s truthful statement is recorded in
verse 50.

**Luke 2:50**, “and they themselves did not understand the statement
which he spoke to them.”

The verb SUNIE.MI is used to denote that the statement [RHE.MA] had to
be understood on a spiritual level. Joseph and Mary are not using their
spiritual frame of reference for this incident.

The negative adverb OUK shows that their misunderstanding was complete
they missed the boat they didn’t even find the dock in fact, they were
not even near the water.

Joseph and Mary are so wrapped up in their own pain that they cannot see
that not only did they mistakenly assume that Christ was in the caravan,
but also there was absolutely nothing wrong with what the boy did in
staying at the temple. Their rationale is irrational: because they
suffered, they assumed him wrong.

It is not that they did not understand Christ’s statement in an academic
sense; it is just that they are so out of fellowship with God that they
will not accept the conclusion of their son. To accept his conclusion is
to admit their wrong, and that is just something that they will not do.
One or the other of them had to be wrong; it was not Christ.

One of the greatest surrenders of pride is to admit that you have caused
your own pain; that is what Joseph and Mary are struggling with. Make no
mistake the accusation of Joseph and Mary is completely unfair. The next
statement is all the more remarkable because of this.

Verse 51 reveals Christ’s obedience in this unfair situation.

**Luke 2:51**, “And he went down with them and came unto Nazareth and he
remained subordinate to them. And his mother was maintaining all these
events in her heart.”

It was His parents original wish to go back home to Nazareth; it was
Christ’s righteous desire to remain in Jerusalem. Since the boy was
under the authority of his parents, he went back down to Nazareth.
Nazareth is down for two reasons: because it is down with respect to
elevation it is downhill; and because it is down with respect to
importance Jerusalem is the most important city of all.

Luke uses a very strong idiom the periphrastic participle to show
Christ’s utter and complete subordination to his parents. It immediately
became DEI a moral necessity to obey his parents’ wishes. It was God’s
direct will in spite of his parents out of fellowship state and the
importance of his interchange with the temple teachers.

Mary was maintaining these things in her heart. This is why we know that
this is Mary’s narration to Luke. Only Mary could know her own heart.
She would have had to tell someone about the thoughts of her heart.

-   The word for maintain is DIETEREI the imperfect tense of DIATEREO.
    The imperfect shows that she did this constantly, not just at one
    moment of time.

-   DIATERO here is contrasted with SUNTEREO of 2:19, when Mary heard
    the words of the wise men from the east. This is not the same as
    treasure. It is closer to remember without reference to an emotional
    appreciation. It literally means to ‘keep through’. This
    concentrates on the duration of the events. Verse 19 concentrates on
    Mary’s understanding; this verse concentrates on her memory without
    reference to understanding.

-   PANTA TA RE.MATA is a phrase which indicates that not only this
    event but many others remained in Mary’s memory.

Jesus’ Young Adulthood
----------------------

The young adulthood of Christ is recorded in verse 52. Translation, “And
Jesus kept on progressing in wisdom and years and blessing before God
and men.”

The verb ***prokopto*** applies to all three statements which follow;
all three are equivalent with reference to the progression which occurs.

The verb means to advance or progress. There is a hint that hard work or
toil that is involved in this advancement, from the stem ***kopos***.

In reality, there is a double advancement that is commensurate with his
advance in age. The age advancement goes on without volition it is the
natural thing.

The other two advances have to do with the good decisions of our Lord in
His young manhood.

***prokopto*** is in the imperfect tense, showing this progression over
a duration of time.

The first way in which Christ grew (as he grew in years) is in wisdom;
***sophia***. His increase in wisdom goes on unabated through the
perception and application of the Word of Truth. Note this in spite of
the fact that his parents made the wrong decision for him.

The second way in which Christ grew (as he grew in years) is in
***charis***.

***charis*** can be translated as grace, or the result of the
appropriation of grace, which is blessing.

Since the appropriation of God’s grace is portrayed in the word
***sophia***, this second thing must concentrate on the blessing side.
The word favor is not a good translation, since it limits the realm of
blessing to opinion. It encompasses much more than respect or opinion.

There are two realms of blessing which are mentioned: human and divine.

The preposition ***para*** plus the dative case of the two nouns shows
that the blessing is in the sight of each category described by those
nouns.

In the sight of is another way of saying viewpoint. The two categories
of blessing are human and divine; ***anthropoids*** and ***theo***.

No matter which viewpoint you take, Christ was blessed in his life as a
young man.

There is no doubt whatsoever that this blessing was due to ***sophia***,
and commensurate with its growth. To: Appropriate Prosperity; Essence of
God Note: this passage and the next take place during the ministry of
Christ, but they reveal details that have to do with his early years.

Mark 6:3 gives reference to Christ’s family life and profession as an
adult. Translation: “‘Is this not the carpenter, the son of Mary and
brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon? Are not his sisters here
with us?’ And they were constantly stumbling at him.”

Christ is speaking in His hometown in his home synagogue. The home crowd
identifies him as one of their own, and they use this against him.

He grew up there, and when they see him teaching they use his family and
his profession against him, as if to destroy his credibility by them.

In the parallel passage of Matt 13:55, Christ is called the son of the
carpenter, a reference to his father.

In these passages, two facts come out: That Christ had at least four
brothers and two sisters (if not more).

This indicates that Joseph and Mary had several children other than
Christ, and as a result Mary did not remain a virgin.

Christ is about 30 years old at this time, and he was the first child in
his family. All of these others were younger, but we know no other
details.

It is apparent that Joseph died at some time after Christ was 12 years
old. If this is so, then no doubt Christ had to take some responsibility
for the younger siblings, especially in the area of logistical
provision. Providing for a family of seven would have been no easy
trick. In addition, he continued his spiritual growth, Lk 2:52.

From Christ’s statement at the cross, it is also apparent that Mary did
not have sufficient means to live on her own, John 19:27.

That Christ was a carpenter and the son of a carpenter. Mat 13:55
identifies that some of the Nazarenes identified Jesus as the son of the
carpenter. Mark 6:3 identifies that some called him a carpenter in his
own right.

There were carpenter guilds at the time which were very similar to the
modern labor unions. Often they provided workers’ benefits such as
unemployment insurance or burial plots. These guilds were also formed
for collective bargaining, and fought for the improvement of working
conditions and workers’ wages.

Because of the antiestablishment nature of these organizations, it is
very unlikely that Jesus was a part of one. Away from population centers
the guilds were less powerful and also less frequently present at all.
Such was the case in Nazareth.

From Today’s Handbook of Bible Times & Customs, p. 123, “This occupation
takes on special significance because both Jesus and Joseph worked at
it. Carpenters were not usually house builders because homes were not
made of wood, but they did have wooden trim and fixtures. Jesus likely
spent His time fashioning ox yokes, stools, plows, cabinets, carts and
lattice windows. On occasion carpenters also made artificial teeth! The
tools Jesus handled were the axe, hatchet, saw, knives, plane and
square. Hammers and bronze nails were in use at the time. It was also
possible that He worked with a bow drill.”

The carpenter was much more of a fringe profession than it is in our
country today. There was not that much good building wood in Israel, and
the homes were made of stone. There would not have been that much work
for a carpenter in a small town like Nazareth. Christ’s hometown crowd
speaks of his profession in a derisive manner.

Although Christ was a carpenter as a young man, he did not use his
experience to illustrate any of his teachings. Perhaps this is a
testimony

Christ’s family and his profession and father’s profession are used as
ad hominem arguments against his ministry.

The phrase which follows their description of him explains their tone of
voice: ‘and they were constantly being stumbled at him.’

An ad hominem argument is one which uses extraneous human arguments as
an attack against credibility. A person’s profession or other family
members are not the issue in credibility, but the Nazarenes use this
against Jesus, because they cannot accept his message, because it hits
too close to home it requires the sacrifice of their pride.

A carpenter in a small town would likely be poor, especially a
fatherless family of seven or more. They are making fun of his family
because they were poor.

Luke 4:16 testifies about Christ’s custom of going to worship in the
synagogue. Translation: “And he went unto Nazareth, where he had been
raised, and he entered according to his custom on the Sabbath day into
the synagogue and he stood up to read.”

Christ’s usual custom was to worship on the Sabbath day in the
synagogue. From the position of the phrase ‘according to his custom’, it
is apparent that his custom of entering the synagogue is restricted to
the sabbath day. Because this occurs in Nazareth, it is likely that it
was his custom to do this in previous years.

It was likely that is was also Christ’s custom to stand up and read the
law. Any male Jew could read and give a sermon in the synagogue.
Arrangements for the sermon were made beforehand, so Christ was
definitely invited to speak here. Since this event occurs after the
first year of Christ’s ministry, he is already very well known
throughout the land.

Although the reading of the Law and the sermon were restricted to the
Sabbath day, it was possible to worship and learn the truth at the
synagogue any day of the week.

Nazareth was a country town, definitely off the beaten path. It had some
military significance because both the Mediterranean and the Sea of
Galilee could be seen from there. It was on a hill which looked both
ways. Jesus could grow and develop his spiritual genius here without
being noticed.

This custom extends back to his days of growing up in Nazareth. This
crowd has heard him speak before, although he had never revealed his
true nature or mission before this time, John 2:4 (my time has not yet
come). They may have liked him before, but now they do not. This is most
likely due to his Messianic claim.

The real reason for the rejection is his teaching, even though the
Nazarenes reject him on another basis. This is typical of those who are
negative to the truth.

Preparing the Way of the Lord (Isaiah 40)
-----------------------------------------

The Jews received the call to leave Egypt. They were to proceed to the
promised land under the leadership of Moses. Between them and the
promised land was a few hundred miles of wilderness. Of course, they had
to cross it.

Leading them was the cloud by day and the fire by night; visible
manifestations of Divine presence. Furthermore, there was the
tabernacle, the tent of meeting with God.

Not long after they left Egypt, God provided a covenant at Mt. Sinai. A
Law which defined individual liberty in ten commandments. That Law also
defined sin.

Because of their involvement in sin and idolatry, the Jews were delayed
in the desert some forty years. Their journey through the wilderness was
anything but straight.

When Isaiah preached the message preserved in Isaiah 40, the southern
kingdom of Judah was in a state of apostasy and their destruction by the
Assyrians was near.

Isaiah preached a message which would remind the Jews of their crooked
path in the desert, and of the reason for their failure: a bankrupt
relationship with God. He would inspire them to build the highway in the
heart, so that there would be a highway in the wilderness.

Isaiah’s message also stood as a prophecy of the ministry of John the
Baptist. It was John’s mission to prepare the hearts of the Jews for
their king and for their new covenant. Malachi 3:1 also predicted the
ministry of the Baptist

The text of Isaiah’s message. “Behold, I am going to send My messenger,
and he will clear the way before Me. And the Lord, whom you seek, will
suddenly come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant, in whom
you delight, behold, He is coming, says the Lord of Armies.”

Isaiah 40:35 contains an excerpt from one of Isaiah’s sermons. It has a
command, and an explanation of that command.

The command comes from verses 35, while the explanation from verses 68.

Verses 35 read like this: “A voice is calling, ‘Clear the way for the
Lord in the wilderness; make smooth in the desert a highway for our God.
Let every valley be lifted up, and every mountain and hill be made low;
and let the rough ground become a plain, and the rugged terrain a broad
valley; then the glory of the Lord will be revealed, and all flesh will
see it together; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken.’”

The Jews would have responded to this message immediately, for the
wilderness journey was a vital part of their national heritage.

Isaiah’s message is about the wilderness of the souls of the people of
Judah, for because of their rejection of God, and their love affairs
with the idols of the Gentiles, they had created an imposing wilderness
indeed.

It is up to them to smooth out the rough places through confession of
sin, and a humble orientation to God’s plan for their lives.

It is only when the hearts of wilderness are smoothed out that the glory
of the Lord is revealed.

This revelation is the millennial rule of the king of kings and lord of
lords, the bright morning star, Jesus Christ. But first the people must
humble themselves to the king and his plan for their lives.

To illustrate the clever nature of Satanic propaganda, observe:

The Jews rejected the millennial king and His kingdom from their
distrust of the Gentile world.

The Gentiles now futilely attempt to bring in that kingdom when it
cannot come without the king bidding.

Verses 68 explain: “a voice says, ‘Call out.’ Then he answered, ‘What
shall I call out?’ All flesh is grass, and all its loveliness is like
the flower of the field. The grass withers, the flower fades, when the
breath of the Lord blows upon it; surely the people are grass. The grass
withers, the flower fades, but the word of our God stands forever.”

Isaiah makes the issue of soul leveling clear in these verses.

Isaiah communicates the mortal and fading nature of the human body, as
contrasted with the word of God.

This is really a ‘you can take it with you’ verse. Everything in this
life will be left behind except the word of God in your soul.

On the basis of this truth, make your priorities straight. Once they are
on the level, your life will become straight as well.

Bible truth is the bulldozer in the soul. Sin and death and Satanic
propaganda are the great mountains and gullies.

Jesus and John the Baptist
--------------------------

John the Baptist had a ministry from God to prepare Israel for the
millennial kingdom and its king.

The ministry of John the Baptist had nothing to do whatsoever with the
church. In essence it is in its own watertight compartment apart from
the church. It drew its precedence from the dispensation of Israel.

John drew his sense of destiny from an Old Testament prophecy concerning
his ministry. Isa

40; Mal 3:1.

Since John and Jesus were cousins, it is likely that they knew one
another as children and young men. John knew exactly who the Messiah
was, and probably long before he ever preached his message.

John began his ministry of repentance and baptism in the Spring of 26
A.D.

So far, we have eliminated confusion concerning the relation of John’s
baptism and the baptism which occurs in the church age.

Now, let us contrast John and Christ.

You must understand that John was the greatest prophet of the age of
Israel. His person and message were greater even than Isaiah or Jeremiah
or any other. Our Lord testified to this in Matthew 11:11.

John had a great following; he was wildly popular among the people of
Israel and even among some Romans.

His mission was to point the way to one even greater. From the seeming
greatest to the even greater.

Long after John was gone, people still gravitated towards his ministry,
even to the exclusion of Christ. In some ways, people still do, whenever
they are legalistic and place great value on outward acts of piety.

Therefore, John 1:1-18 will serve well to teach us some general truths
about Christ and the contrast between he and John the Baptist. In no
small part it was what John the apostle was trying to accomplish in this
passage.

John 1:1-18 picks up the issue from the beginning and also describes
John’s relationship to Christ.

Verse 1 translation: “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with the God, and God was the Word.”

This verse is divided into three clauses, each of which make a statement
concerning Jesus Christ.

John (the writer of this gospel) uses the term ‘the Word’ to describe
Christ. This term has quite a history in Greek and Hebrew thought (to
doctrine of logos).

The first clause places the existence of the Word in eternity past.

The phrase ***en arche***. emphasizes the qualitative aspect of the
beginning. This is the beginning of Gen. 1:1; the beginning before the
heavens and the earth were created.

The imperfect tense of the verb ***eimi*** reveals the eternity of the
Word in the beginning. The existence of the Word went on and on.

The term ***ho logos*** shows the personification of order and wisdom
existing on and on before the creation of the heavens and the earth.
This is a person, and not just a principle.

Thus from the beginning of John’s gospel you know that we are talking
about God.

The second clause indicates the coexistence of the Word with the God.
The proper noun ***Theos*** is preceded by the definite article ho. It
points out that this is the one and only God; not just one God among
many. Thus we know of at least two persons in the Godhead. The
preposition pros shows the face to face presence of one with the other.

The third clause is one which clarifies the divine nature of the Word.
There is no doubt from this clause that the Word was always God. Again
the imperfect tense testifies to the timeless nature of the Word.

So the first contrast: with Christ we have God; John is man, created by
God.

The second verse offers even more clarification on the trinity and the
preexistence of the Word: “This one was in the beginning with the God.”

The demonstrative pronoun ***houtos*** points back to the ***logos***.
It is translated ‘this one’.

The imperfect tense of the verb to be makes the action timeless, eternal
in nature.

The phrase ***en arche*** is used again to point to the time before the
creation, eternity past.

The phrase ***pros Theos*** again shows the face to face presence of the
***logos*** and the ***theos***.

Verse three turns to the creation. Up to this point all activity has
been in precreation eternity past. “All things came into being through
him, and outside of Him not one thing that came into being came into
being.”

This verse describes the ***logos*** as the agent of the creation.

All things is from the Greek ***panta***. It refers to both creatures
and the material universe apart from living creatures.

Whether the material universe or living creatures, all were created by
God the agency of Jesus Christ.

Along with this creation is the responsibility of maintenance, which is
also handled by the deity of Jesus Christ, Col. 1:16-17.

Notice that God is apart from the material universe; he created it, but
it is not Him.

The inchoative aorist tense of ***ginomai*** reveals that the creatures
and material universe had a definite beginning. ***ginomai*** itself
describe the ‘becoming’ of something its beginning. This is contrasted
strongly with the being of the Godhead in the previous verses.

Again, John is very thorough by his repetition of the idea. He wants his
readers to make no mistake about what he is saying, so he clarifies the
original statement by stating the absolute in the negative. ’and outside
of Him not one thing that came into being came into being."

The second contrast to John the Baptist is the creator contrast the Word
created; John could not.

Verse 4 turns back to eternity past and then marches forward into the
time of men. “In Him was life, and that life was the light of men.”

There was always life in Jesus Christ: this is indicated by the
imperfect tense of the Greek verb to be, ***eimi***.

This life, ***zoe***, is much more than the principle of biological life
it was soul life. ***zoe*** rises above animal instinct and behavior to
the independence of the soul. And not just the function of volition, but
the soul as it was designed to enjoy God and His provision.

From eternity past Christ had this life, and this life was given to Adam
and the woman.

That same life was surrendered to the slavery of Satan at the fall, but
it was never lost by Christ.

Christ is life, real life, personified. The life of Christ was the light
of men.

At last the Word and the Life enter into time.

Although it always existed and always will exist, the Word of Life
entered into time and was the light of men.

Light is the opposite of darkness. Light always destroys darkness, but
darkness cannot overcome the light. Darkness is the result of obscuring
the light, but the light always exists. Light and darkness are
incompatible mutually exclusive. The Sun always shines, but there are
times when we do not see it.

God the Holy Spirit provides the light so that we can comprehend the
Word. In order to see the Word we must have light.

This life was the light of men in the past. It kept on shining. This
sums up the first incarnation.

Verse five gives the final description of Christ, bringing Him into
present times (for John and for us). “And the light shines in the
darkness, and the darkness did not grasp it.”

There is a nice little double entendre here with the ***katalambano***.
It has the dual meaning of overcome and comprehend. Had the forces of
darkness truly comprehended the intrinsic good of the light, then it
would not have tried to put it out.

John uses the present tense of the verb ***phaino*** to portray Christ’s
present shining. Even though he died on the cross he still shines now.

Christ is the Sun (1 Cor 15:41), and the Morning Star (Rev 22:16). The
Morning Star shines just before sunup. It shines as the darkness is
about to end.

The darkness is the darkness of the devil’s world.

Verse six turns to our man, John the Baptist. “There came a man, the
side of God, his name, John;” Even the style of this verse differs from
that of the previous five. It is very spare and understated, as if to
downplay the nature of this man, especially when compared to Christ.
Although John’s writing style is almost always simple, here it become
hyper-simple, and less elegant than John’s brief discourse on Christ.

The verb ***egeneto*** is used here to describe the arrival of John.
Again it is the inchoative aorist that John uses to describe the
beginning of an action. John had a definite beginning. It is also the
same verb that John has used previously to describe the creation by the
Word. John was one created by the creator. But this verb more describes
the arrival of John’s public ministry than the creation of his soul.

The noun ***anthropos*** leaves no doubt about the true nature of John.
He is a man of the human race.

The participle ***apestalmenos*** portrays the action of God in sending
John the Baptist. It is from the verb ***apostello***, ‘to send forth’.
It is the perfect participle, so it shows that before John arrived
someone sent him. It is the passive participle, so it shows that it was
not John who was the ultimate source of arrival, but someone else.

The preposition ***para*** points to the source of the sending it is
God. This shows that John came from the side of God. A figure of speech
that reveals how very close John the Baptist was to God. Before John
began his ministry he was close to God he prepared himself in a very
thorough manner by laying aside the distractions of everyday life.

The final phrase of the verse is to the point of being laconic. Three
nouns lay alongside one another to identify the name of the man sent
from the side of God.

Verse seven continues John’s description of John. “He himself came as a
witness that he might testify concerning the light, that all might
believe through him.”

The aorist verb ***elthen*** describes again the arrival of John on the
scene. It is translated, ‘he came’.

The subject of the verb is ***houtos***, the demonstrative pronoun used
to intensify the source of the action in the verb. It points strongly to
John in contrast to Jesus Christ.

The preposition ***eis*** plus the accusative case of the noun
***marturian*** is translated, “as a witness.” John was a witness, a man
who pointed to the truth of the matter.

John then goes on to give the twofold purpose of the Baptist’s ministry,
using the particle ***hina*** twice to introduce two purpose clause.

The first clause is ***hina marturese. peri tou photos***. “that he
might testify concerning the light.”

The potential subjunctive mood of the verb ***marture.se***. indicates
that John had a responsibility to fulfill in his ministry. This mood
lays the emphasis on human volition, or choice.

John’s responsibility was in area of testimony he was to give his
testimony about the light. The light, of course is Jesus Christ.

Notice that this passage does not say it was John’s responsibility to
convert people. That is addressed in the next clause.

The second clause is ***hina pantes pisteuso.sin di’autou***. “that all
might believe through him.”

The subject of the clause is all those who were alive at the time of
John’s ministry.

The responsibility of the potential subjunctive lies squarely on the
shoulders of John’s audience. Their responsibility is to believe in what
John has to say. This responsibility is not John’s. They believe through
him, but John does not do the believing.

This summarizes very well the issue in personal evangelism. It is our
responsibility to testify concerning the light; it is their
responsibility to believe. You have completely and totally succeeded in
your mission if you get the word out, regardless of how your audience
responds.

If this is true, then do not fear rejection does not matter to the
messenger. You should always be glad when someone believes on account of
your testimony. However, you should be objective about your duty no
matter what the response. The accomplishment of your mission should
never depend on whether you are getting positive results.

Verse eight makes a clarification for the sake of being thorough: “He
himself was not the light, but came that he might testify concerning the
light.”

The far demonstrative is used to point to John the Baptist. Used in
conjunction with the verb to be, an emphatic contrast is set up between
the light and the witness to the light.

John’s purpose in life is reiterated in the second clause. There he
quickly goes over what he has already communicated.

All of this adds up to a very thorough and even redundant statement
about John’s role in relation to Christ.

Since John has gone so far out of his way to put the Baptist into his
place, it is fair to assume that there was a problem with Baptist
worship at the time.

Verse nine turns back to Christ, and begins to add some details about
Him, “He was the true light, who illuminates every man, coming into the
world.” This is very poorly translated into your English Bible, and so
we must make some corrections.

There is first an addition of one adjective to the idea of light:
***ale.thinon,*** true. There were many false messiahs at the time of
Christ, and even the Baptist was thought to be the Messiah himself, he
was so magnificent. Therefore the light is qualified as the true light.

The next statement reveals a function of the light related to creation.
It begins with the definite article used as the relative pronoun
***ho***, which simply picks up the true light from the previous clause
and makes it the subject of the verb of this sentence.

The verb ***pho.tizei*** describes the action of illumination. This is a
transitive verb, so the translation shining does not work as well as
illumination. This is the light shining on someone or something giving
its light.

This is a figure of speech which refers to the availability of Divine
illumination from birth.

The idea of illumination, when used as a figure of speech, always
describes the process of understanding.

The object of the verb is ***panta anthro.pon***. This is translated
“every man”. John chooses to emphasize the individual by using the
singular of anthro.pon. The illuminated truth is available to every man
from the moment that he enters the world.

The third clause of the verse indicates the moment of illumination.

This clause begins with the accusative participle ***erchomenon***. This
participle can only be connected with ***anthro.pon***, since
***anthro.pon*** is the only noun in the previous sentence that is in
the accusative case. ***ale.thinon***, which appears to be in the
accusative is actually in the nominative neuter as the predicate of the
first clause.

Grammatically, the participle can only describe the coming of every
human being into the world. The phrase ***eis ton kosmon***describes a
transition from one place to another.

Verse ten reveals the relationship between Christ and the world. “He was
in the world, and the world came into being through him, but the world
did not know him.” There are three parts to this verse: The incarnation;
eternity past; and a comment on the two.

He was in the world. This testifies to the incarnation that God came
into the world. That he came as a human is revealed in a later verse.
For right now it is enough to know that God came into the world.

The world here is planet earth, the habitation for humanity.

And the world came into being through him. This is a repetition of an
idea already introduced, but now there is more of a context for it.

Because God created the world, He is truly outside of it. He exists
completely independent of space and time. Now the world is planet earth
and all its inhabitants.

But this is significant on the basis of the first clause of the verse he
was in the world, the same world that he created. God is responsible
towards his creation.

The conjunction ***kai*** sets up a mild contrast to that which has come
previously in the verse. The contrast has to do with the difference
between what God has done for man and how man responded.

God came into the world the greatest sacrifice and expression of love in
history.

God created that same world.

But the world did not know him. This is a description of the response of
humanity to the incarnation. They did not know him describes both
recognition and acceptance. Although Christ presented himself as the Son
of God, the world did not accept Him as such.

Here ***ho kosmos*** is identified with the human race at the time of
the incarnation.

Verse 11 tells of the coming of the Word to a chosen people, “He came
unto His own, and His own did not receive Him.”

This of course is a reference to the Jews and their rejection of Him.

The Jews were the chosen people of the Messiah, and they did have a long
association with Him, going back to the very beginnings of their
history.

He came to them; He was the Messiah; and yet they did not receive Him.
The objective negative adverb ou makes it clear that this was a complete
rejection. Of course what rejection is more complete than death?

Verse 12 identifies the shift in Christ’s ministry: “But as many as
received Him, to them He gave the authority to become children of God,
to those who believe unto His name.”

The correlative pronoun ***hosoi*** describes a direct correlation
between those who receive Christ and what they receive as a result. The
number is an exact correlation, so that no one is short changed.

The aorist tense of the verb ***lambano*** describes the action. It is
past action, summed up in one moment of time. It is translated
“received”, and it is a synonym for trust or belief in Christ.

The accusative direct object ***auton*** identifies the object of
belief, who is Christ: Him.

The second clause of the verse puts down what those who receive Christ
receive in return.

The dative indirect object of the personal pronoun *autois* identifies
the receivers as those who receive Christ. “to them”.

The aorist tense of the verb ***didomi*** identifies a past action that
is seen in one moment of time. It is translated “He gave.” The ‘He’ here
is Jesus Christ, the living Word.

What is given is a right, ***exousia***. This word describes legitimate
authority, and individual rights. Since this is given to individuals, it
is better to call this a right given by God.

The right is related to a potential. The right implies responsibility.
The infinitive verb genesthai is from the verb ginomai ‘to become’. It
is the aorist infinitive, which is the complement of exousia. A right
always has a direction. It may take the direction of free speech or
bearing arms. Rights are divided into realms. Here the realm is related
to a potential: the potential to become children of God.

Becoming a child of God is not something which occurs at salvation; it
is there only in the form of potential. At salvation God gives you the
right to become a child of God; whether you do so is entirely up to the
free expression of your volition.

Therefore, being a child of God is not synonymous with salvation. It is
identified here as the goal of post salvation life. In this case, being
a child of God is equal to being a mature believer in Christ.

As a child imitates the parents, so the adopted child of God is to
become an imitator of Him.

Verse thirteen is the follow up to the twelfth: “who have been born not
from bloodshed nor from the will of flesh nor from the will of man but
from God.”

This verse comments on how one becomes a child of God. You must be born
first.

The aorist passive verb ***egennethesan*** makes it clear that the birth
is outside of the choice of the one being born. The objective negative
adverb ouk shows that the three things listed before God are definitely
not the way.

John sets up this verse in anticipation of the guesses of his
readership.

When he says ‘who have been born’, he anticipates them thinking of a
change in life, as illustrated by birth.

There are three types of changes cited by John: change by violence;
change by self; and change by someone else’s’ will.

Remember that the context of verse twelve is not salvation, but post
salvation spiritual growth. The context is change, not salvation. John
uses the figure of birth to portray post salvation spiritual growth in
his epistle.

The word ***haimaton*** is translated, ‘bloodshed’. It is in the plural
here, and the plural of this noun always depicts the shedding of
innocent blood. It could easily be translated ‘violence’. This is
emphatically not a portrayal of the physical birth of a child, but
instead of attempting to bring change about through violence. The threat
of physical violence to a person does not bring about true change.

The next possibility of the means of change is from the Greek phrase
***ek thelematos sarkos***. This is change from the will of the flesh.
***sarkos*** is the Greek word for flesh, and it often describes the
activity of the Old Sin Nature. It certainly does here.

What comes from the sin nature may be change in the sense of
‘different’, but never in the sense of ‘better’.

Changing the trend of your sin nature from self-righteous moral
degeneracy to immoral overt degeneracy or vice versa is definitely not a
change for the better. In fact, sometimes it is a change for the worse.

The noun ***thelematos*** outlines the function of volition. Here it is
the human volition as controlled by the Old Sin Nature.

You cannot do it is impossible to bring about change in your life by
your own efforts.

No campaign of self-improvement apart from the grace of God can
accomplish intrinsic and lasting good.

The appearance of good may be achieved by self, but underneath the
appearance remains a wicked heart.

Do not allow yourself to fall prey to anti-grace sentiment about self.

The third possibility for change is ***ek thelematosandros*** ‘from the
will of man’.

This phrase contrast the previous one by emphasizing dependence on
others as a viable means for personal change.

Again, this may bring about a change in the sin nature trend; a change
of outward appearance, but underneath remains the wicked heart.

Welding your own will to that of another may effectively stop a pattern
of overt behavior, but it is not in any way the means to true change.

This phrase includes counseling and discipling in the bad sense of the
word. Those things do not bring about true change any more than the sin
nature can.

The only real catalyst for change is God, as explained by the Greek
phrase alla ek Theou.

The conjunction ***alla*** indicates a very strong contrast with what
has gone previously. What is to follow is the right and true way to the
change of heart. It is the true post salvation change.

***ek Theou*** tells us that true change only comes from God, and this
is the set up for what is to follow in verse 14.

Get it through your heads that you can only bring about true change
through the change of heart that is brought on by faith perception of
the truth.

Faith perception is what makes Christianity distinct from all religions.

Faith perception is what makes Christianity distinct from all worldly
means of false change.

Faith perception is what makes Christianity work, period.

Verse 14 now defines how the change was brought about: “And the Word
became flesh and camped among us, and we beheld His glory, glory as a
unique and only born one from the side of the Father, full of Grace and
Truth.”

The verse begins with the conjunction ***kai*** which continues the
train of thought from the previous verse.

The noun ***logos*** is next, and with the definite article ho it is
translated “the word”. It is the subject of the sentence, and of course
it is describing Christ.

The verb of the sentence is ***egeneto***, which describes the beginning
of the hypostatic union at the virgin birth. It is in the aorist tense,
so it portrays one moment of time in the past. It is translated,
“became”.

***sarx*** is the Greek word for flesh, and in this case it describes
the physical human body, with no sin nature.

The conjunction ***kai*** shifts the thought to another fact about the
incarnation. It is translated “and”.

The aorist verb ***skenosen*** depicts an action from the past as
occurring in one moment of time. It describes the temporary dwelling in
a tent. “Camped” is a good way to translate this.

The preposition ***en*** plus the locative of place is translated here
“among us”.

Again the conjunction ***kai*** is used by John to shift to another fact
about the incarnation, this time a more personal one.

The verb ***etheasametha*** is in the first person plural and so it
reveals that John was an eyewitness to these events. It is in the aorist
tense, and so it sums up the past action into one moment of time. The
verb itself describes the act of witnessing an event with your own eyes.
It is translated “we beheld” or “we eyewitnessed”.

The object witnessed was ***te.n doxan auton**.*, which is translated
“His glory”.

This may be taken in the narrow sense of the transfiguration, or in the
wider sense of His entire life, but we will go with the latter, as it
seems to fit the context a little better.

Glory is a synonym for the essence, capabilities and attributes of God,
as well as His actions toward mankind.

Glory here represents the reflection of the glory of the Father in the
life of the Son.

This glory is further described with the phrase ***doxan hos monogenous
para patros***.

The comparative conjunction ***hos*** makes an exact comparison between
the status described and the glory itself. This is translated “as”.

The status is ***monogenes***, which contains the idea of “unique and
only born”.

Completing the idea is the preposition ***para*** and the noun
***patros***. The preposition indicates that the action proceeds from
the very side of the person named, which in this instance is the Father.

The final description of the incarnation ***isple.re.s charitos kai
ale.theias*****.**

***ple.re.s***describes a state of being completely full, and it is
translated “full”.

The genitive of description of the noun ***charitos*** is translated
“grace”.

The connective conjunction***kai*** is translated “and”.

The noun ***ale.theias*** is in the genitive case, and translated
“truth”.

This is the full explanation of our birth from God.

This verse progressively explains the statement in the previous verse
about being born from God.

Verse 13 gave three ways in which the salvation birth is not
accomplished, and then goes on to state that it instead comes from God.

The salvation birth is based on the following:

That the word became flesh. This defines the person through whom our
salvation was accomplished.

That the word camped, or temporarily lived among us. Our salvation was
accomplished while Christ was living on planet earth.

That the word was observed by other human beings, even the writer of
this gospel.

That the life of the word was glory and this glory was related to the
Father as the only born Son. Our salvation was accomplished by the Son
of God.

The Son of God was full of grace and truth. Grace and truth are the
opposites of the three things on the list in verse thirteen: violence,
self reliance, and reliance on others.

If an unbeliever can use it or do it, it is not a part of God’s plan for
salvation or the post salvation life.

Christ represents both our salvation and the secret to the post
salvation life.

It all depends on Divine provision, and the key to that provision is the
truth. You cannot possibly access divine provision without knowing the
truth, and therefore the truth must be the first priority in the
Christian life.

Just as you cannot become a believer without the gospel, so also you
cannot reach maturity without the Bible.

Just as you cannot perceive the gospel without the ministry of the
Spirit, so also you cannot perceive the truth without.

Just as you must believe in the gospel in order to be saved, so also you
must believe the truth in order to reach maturity.

Verse 15 turns back to the testimony of John: “John testified concerning
him and cried out saying,”This was he about whom I said ‘The one coming
after me has attained rank above me, because He was (always) first with
reference to me.’“”

This is John’s statement of humility. It confirms from his own mouth
what John the apostle has already stated in verses 6 through 8. At the
time of his ministry John the Baptist knew exactly where he stood with
reference to his second cousin, the Messiah.

This verse forms a link between verses 14 and 16, so that Christ’s rank
is confirmed before turning back to the subject of grace.

Most of the difficulty in translating this verse comes in John the
Baptist’s statement itself, and we will concentrate our efforts in
exegesis there. The rest of the verse is well translated and needs no
tweaking.

John’s statement begins with the definite article ***ho***, which is
attached to the participle erchomenos at the end of the verse. Together
they are translated “the one coming”. The participle is in the present
tense and so portrays its action at the same time as the main verb.

The adverb ***opiso*** is translated “after”. It is a temporal adverb
showing Christ’s appearance as following that of John. John is
identifying the Messiah, and those who followed John would have known
that, since it was the force of his ministry.

The second phrase is ***emprosthen mou gegonen***. We have translated
this “has attained rank above me.”

The preposition ***emprosthen*** here describes the status of rank.
Although it is normally translated ‘before’ with reference to face to
face presence, it takes up the idea of one being before another in a
line. But we will not forsake the personal nature of this preposition.
John and Jesus are second cousins according to the flesh. They at least
knew one another as acquaintances growing up.

The perfect tense of the verb ***gegonen*** shows that the attainment of
rank happened in one moment of time, and that moment is portrayed as
having an impact forever.

With the preposition mou John the Baptist identifies himself as the
lower ranked one of the two.

The explanation comes in the third phrase, which is translated, “because
He was always first with reference to me”.

The explanatory use of the conjunction ***hoti*** points to the last few
words of the verse as the explanation of what has just been said.

The imperfect tense of the verb to be describes the eternal existence of
the rank of Jesus Christ.

The built in third person singular ‘he’ identifies Jesus Christ as the
one who produces the action of the verb.

The adverb ***protos*** indicates the highest rank of all: first.

The personal pronoun in the genitive case takes the adverbial genitive
of reference, and so is translated, ‘with reference to me.’ This is not
a statement of the priorities of the Baptist, but of comparison.

The comparison is valid with reference to every human being.

John’s statement of the supreme rank of Christ fits into the overall
narrative.

Christ is God.

The Word became flesh.

Jesus Christ was always first, relative to John and to the whole world.

Only God could become flesh; flesh could never become God. Only the
first could become last, the highest ranking die for all those of lower
rank.

John’s testimony confirms Christ’s preeminent rank. John 1:7; John 1:27.

Christ’s self testimony doesthe same thing. Rev 1:17; Rev 22:13.

Verse 16 makes the grace of God a personal thing. It too is an
explanation of verse 14, and it is translated “For of His fullness we
have all received, even (superior) grace in exchange for grace.” This is
also the setup for verse 17 which explains this one in even fuller
detail.

The fullness referred to here is the fullness of Jesus Christ presented
in verse 14. It is the fullness with reference to grace and truth.

That same fullness was received (aorist tense) by John and others, and
of course is available to us.

The ascensive use of the conjunction ***kai*** leads up to a literary
climax, ***charin anti charitos***. It is translated, “even grace in
exchange for grace”. Note that the ascensive use points to a further
description of the same thing, and does not add a new thing to another.
It is not “and grace…”

The final three words describe a trade up; one thing for another, but
the thing received is far superior to the thing exchanged. It is one
grace for a superior grace.

This is a description of the tradeout of dispensations brought about by
the first advent.

It is very important to realize that the dispensation of Moses was also
a dispensation of grace and that the Law was a grace provision of God.

The plan of God for the church is very superior to the ritual plan for
Israel, but it is not a complete change of policy on God’s part. Grace
always has and always will be the policy of God toward mankind. It must
be that way.

Verse 17 continues the thought: “For the Law was given through Moses,
the grace and the truth came through Jesus Christ.”

The real comparison in this verse is between Moses and Christ. Of the
two, Christ is far superior.

The two dispensations find their distinctions for that very reason:
their human leaders and administrators.

God was the one who gave the law; Moses was the human agent.

Now let us turn to a comparison between the Law and Christ.

Christ is the fulfillment of the Mosaic Law, Matt 5:17.

Belief in Moses’ Law led to a belief in Christ, John 5:4547.

Verse 18 finishes the discourse, “No one has ever seen God; the only
born God who is unto the bosom of the Father He explains.”

The nominative case of the pronoun ***oudeis*** forms the subject of the
first phrase of this verse. It is translated, “no one”.

The verb ***heo.raken*** is in the perfect tense, describing a past
action that has lasting results into the present and even future. It is
the verb which describes the faculty of sight, and so is translated,
“has seen”

Inserted between the subject and verb is the adverb ***po.pote***, which
is translated “ever”.

The object of the sentence is the proper noun theon, which is in the
accusative case. It receives the action of ***heo.raken***, and is
translated “God”.

No one has ever seen God. This is a complaint that so many unbelievers
have. They do not see God, and therefore they do not see a relationship
with Him as important or relevant.

Up to the moment in history when John wrote, there had been theophanies
of various kinds, but never a direct revelation of the person of God.

But then the word became flesh and dwelt among us.

The subject of the next phrase of the clause is ***monogene.s theos***.
These two, the adjective and noun, are both in the nominative case, and
produce the action of the sentence. ***monogene.s*** denotes a unique
birth. Only one man was ever born a virgin, as only one has received the
resurrection. The proper noun ***theos*** concentrates on the hypostatic
union. This is translated, “the only born God”. Jesus Christ is the
unique person of the universe, the God man.

Next there is the definite article ***ho*** and participle ***o.n***.
These are translated together “the one who is” There is an eternal
nature to these words conveyed by the combination of the present tense
of the participle and the nature of its subject, God the Son.
Furthermore, the prepositional phrase ***eis ton kolpn tou patros***
follows. The preposition ***eis*** describes the Son as being in a
constant state of motion. This motion is directed toward the bosom of
the Father.

***kolpon*** is the Greek word for bosom and it portrays fellowship of
the closest nature. “like a child at rest on its mother’s breast”, or
John resting on our Lord’s chest at the last supper. Complete trust is
required.

The Son is always in the closest of fellowship with the Father. This
describes their coequal and coeternal status, and the reliance of the
Son on the Father throughout the incarnation.

The verb of this final clause is ***exe.ge.sato***. This is the aorist
tense, which portrays a past action and sums that action up into one
moment of time. It means to draw out or explain something, and it is the
Greek word on which is based our English exegesis. We will translate it
“explained”

The demonstrative pronoun ***ekeinos*** is inserted as a duplication of
the subject. There is no object.

The Word became flesh and explained the Father. In just what way the Son
explains the Father we are about to study.

The Wilderness Temptation of Christ
-----------------------------------

The introductory verses, or how Christ got to the wilderness. The three
gospel accounts of the event differ substantially so as to shed as much
light as possible on it. Since Divine Guidance is in view here, we will
exegete each passage in turn in order to get the details.

**Matthew 4:1**, “Then Jesus was led up into the wilderness by the
Spirit to be tempted by the devil”

The adverb of time ***pote*** is translated ‘then’. It reveals the
sequence of events in Christ’s life. Mark uses the adverb ***euthus***
to communicate the immediate aspect of this transition.

***ie.sous***is the proper noun used as the subject of the sentence.
This is ‘Jesus’.

The verb is ***ane.chthe***. It is in the passive voice, which indicates
that our Lord did not produce the action of the verb but instead
received it. The constantive aorist tense summarizes the past action
into one moment of time. The verb itself means to lead from a lower to a
higher point. This point can be figurative, as in the case of spiritual
maturity, or literal, as in this instance.

Christ was going from the low point of the Jordan River (just a few
miles from the lowest land elevation on the planet) to the rough
wilderness above. This emphatically does not mean snatched away, as some
have tried to make the point that the Spirit picked our Lord up and
bodily moved Him to the desert. This is translated, ‘was led up’ The
Spirit did the leading and Christ did the following. Exactly how this
occurred will be the subject of our study of the doctrine of divine
guidance.

The prepositional phrase ***eis te.n ere.mon*** describes the
geographical transition from the Jordan to the Wilderness. It is
translated “into the desert”.

A second prepositional phrase puts forth the leadership of the Spirit,
who was the direct agent of the leading. It is ***hupo tou pneumatos***,
and translated "by the Spirit.

The last clause of the verse is a purpose clause which is
***peirasthe.nai hupo tou diabolou***. The verb is the aorist passive of
***peirazo***, which means to put someone to the test. Depending on the
one doing the test, the purpose may be good or bad. This is translated,
’to be tempted by the devil"

Notice that ***hupo tou diabolou*** is identical to ***hupo tou
pneumatou***. In the battle to come, it will be the ministry of God the
Holy Spirit verses the temptation of the devil.

This is the first evidence testing done under the conditions of the
church age. Christ is our prototype for the fulfillment of God’s plan
for the church age dispensation. An entirely new and never before tried
set of grace assets will be put through its paces over the next forty
plus days.

**Mark 1:12**, “And immediately the Spirit cast Him out into the desert”

The major difference here is in the verb that is used to describe the
action of the Spirit in getting Christ to the desert.

In this verse, ***to pneuma***, the Spirit, is the subject, and
***auton*** the personal pronoun describing Christ is the object. This
reveals that once under the leadership of the Spirit there was no doubt
whatsoever as to what would happen.

The verb ***ekballei*** is in the present tense, which reveals an action
as it happens. It is the dramatic way to present the action typical of
Mark’s gospel. The verb literally means to cast out. The Spirit ‘cast
out’ Christ into the wilderness ***eis te.n ere.mon***. Again we do not
yet know how this occurred, only that it did.

**Luke 4:1**, “And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit returned from the
Jordan and was being led by means of the Spirit in the desert.” The main
change here is the revelation that Christ was led by the Spirit for the
duration of His stay in the desert, and that it was from a state of
being full from the Spirit that gave the leadership.

The verse begins with the post positive conjunction ***de*** which
serves as a transition from the genealogy in the last part of chapter 3.
Its force is, "now let’s turn to another subject.

Four words work together to form the foundational statement of the
verse: ***Ie.sous ple.re.s pneumatos hagiou***. They are translated
“Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit.”

The nominative case of ***ple.re.s*** forms the key part of the
description it denotes a state of complete fullness. It can denote
thought or emotion, negative or positive, but the idea here refers to
the control of the soul.

The verse does not say how, but it does make it clear that ***Ie.sous***
is under the control of ***pneumatos hagiou***.

The first thing that Jesus does under the control of the Spirit is
return from the Jordan, where he had just been baptized. The word for
returned is ***hupestrepsen***, which is in the aorist tense. This
describes a past action occurring in one moment of time, and thus the
translation “He returned”.

The second thing is that “He was being led by means of the Spirit.”

The verb ***e.geto*** is from ago, which is the simple verb for the act
of leading. It is in the passive voice and so reveals that the subject
receives the action of leadership. The imperfect tense indicates that
the action took place over a duration of time in the past, and not just
at one moment. It is translated, “He was being led.”

The preposition ***en*** plus the instrumental case of means shows that
the Spirit was the means of the leading.

***en te. eremo***. portrays both location in the desert and the amount
of time spent there. It is translated, “in the desert” This tells us
that the Spirit not only led Christ to the desert, but also the entire
time that He was there.

Analysis of the three.

Although in all three cases Christ got to the wilderness under the
leadership of the Spirit, nowhere are there specific mechanics
mentioned. This does not indicate however that there were no mechanics
at work.

If no mechanics are mentioned, then we must fall back on what we do know
about the ministry of the Spirit in relation to Divine Guidance.

The guidance of the Spirit for Christ in the desert must therefore fall
within what the New Testament teaches about the guidance of the Spirit
in the church age.

Christ is the author and perfecter of our faith. As he goes we should
follow.

DIVINE GUIDANCE OF CHRIST FOR HIS DESERT EXPERIENCE

The Old Testament had plenty of guidance for Christ with reference to
His destiny in the desert. Israel experienced several notable failures
while wandering in the Wilderness. All three of these failures include
both a failure in leadership and a failure in the people to follow. All
of the events in the history of Israel are recorded for the benefit of
Christian believers of all time.

**Read 1 Cor. 10:1-15**

Jesus Christ himself was certainly aware of the will of God with respect
to these events.

Some of the events during which Israel failed are:

The Provision of Manna

The Golden Calf Episode

Aaron’s Rod that Budded

The Waters of Meribah

MANNA

Num 11:6; Josh 5:12; Psa 105:40; Ex 16.

Name. Manna means “What is it?” in the Hebrew. This is after the
response of the Jews when they saw it for the first time.

Physical Description:

Ex 16:13,14,21 “and in the morning there was a layer of dew around the
camp. When the layer of dew evaporated, behold, on the surface of the
wilderness there was a fine flake like thing, fine as the frost on the
ground… but when the sun grew hot, it would melt.”

Ex 16:20, “But they did not listen to Moses, and some left part of it
until morning, and it bred worms and became foul; and Moses was angry
with them.”

Ex 16:31, “And the house of Israel named it manna, and it was like
coriander seed, white; and its taste was like wafers with honey.”

Num 11:7, “Now the Manna was like coriander seed, and its appearance
like that of bedellium.”

Num 11:8, “The people would go about and gather it and grind it between
two millstones or beat it in the mortar, and boil it in the pot and make
cakes with it; and its taste was as the taste of cakes baked with oil.”

It was eaten for the duration of the wilderness experience of the
children of Israel.

Its cessation after 40 years was significant enough to be recorded by
Joshua, Josh 5:12.

Manna was a miraculous grace provision from God, Ex 16:32, “Then Moses
said, ‘This is what the Lord has commanded, ’Let an omer full of it be
kept throughout your generations, that they may see the bread that I fed
you in the wilderness, when I brought you out of the land of Egypt.’”

After a while the children of Israel became dissatisfied with the
monotony of manna, Num 11:46, “And the rabble who were among them had
greedy desires; and also the sons of Israel wept again and said, ‘Who
will give us meat to eat? We remember the fish which we used to eat free
in Egypt, the cucumbers and the melons and the leeks and the onions and
the garlic, but now our appetite is gone. There is nothing at all to
look at except this manna.’”

Note that this was a rejection of the grace of God, and therefore called
into question His Holy character.

Note the desire to return to Egypt. The Old Testament records the
expression of this desire no less than eight times it was probably
muttered on many other occasions.

It was the Lord’s original plan to give the people meat for a month. So
much so that it would come out of their nostrils. Moses failed to
believe the Lord, and thus a plague was sent.

The lust of the rabble was met with quail by the millions Num 11:31,
“Now there went forth a wind from the Lord, and it brought quail from
the sea, and let them fall beside the camp, about a day’s journey on
this side and a day’s journey on the other side, all around the camp,
and they spread them out for themselves all around the camp.”

Those who went t o gather quail would have had to go through the manna
fall in order to reach the dead birds.

After a day in the desert sun the quail was well past its prime. In
fact, the plague struck those who were foolish enough to eat it. v.33,
“While the meat was still between their teeth, before it was chewed, the
anger of the Lord was kindled against the people, and the Lord struck
the people with a very severe plague.”

This punitive discipline was designed to wake up the Israelites and
renew their dependence on logistical grace.

Christ used manna to illustrate the grace assets related to salvation
and eternal life, John 6:3133, “Our fathers ate the manna in the
wilderness; as it is written, ‘He gave them bread out of heaven to eat.’
Jesus therefore said to them, ’Truly truly I say to you, it is not Moses
who has given you the bread out of heaven, but it is My Father who gives
you the true bread out of Heaven. For the bread of God is that which
comes down out of heaven, and gives life to the world.”

The grumbling of Israel is analogous to any time that we call into
question the grace provision of God, whether in spiritual or physical
form.

10. This failure was memorialized by the placement of a pot of manna
inside of the ark of the covenant. In spite of the failure, the covenant
continued, covered by the ark of the covenant.

THE GOLDEN CALF

Exo. 32; 1 Kings 12:28; 2 Kings 10:29.

The Golden calf represents the failure of the children of Israel at the
Holy Mountain of God.

It was there that they made an idol because of their impatience with
Moses, who had been on the mountain with God for what they considered as
too long.

Ex 32:14, “Now when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down from
the mountain, the people assembled about Aaron, and said to him, ‘Come,
make us a god who will go before us; as for this Moses, the man who
brought us up from the land of Egypt, we do not know what has become of
him.’ And Aaron said to them, ‘Tear off the gold rings which are in the
ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters, and bring them to
me.’ Then all the people tore off the gold rings which were in their
ears, and brought them to Aaron. And he took this from their hand, and
fashioned it with a graving tool, and made it into a molten calf; and
they said, ‘This is your god, O Israel, who brought you up from the land
of Egypt.’”

Notice that the people have yet to receive the tablets, but they have
already received the commandment against idolatry, and so they are
sinning in cognizance against God, Ex 20:23.

Notice also Aaron’s direct involvement in this caper. He fashioned it
with his own hands.

The people recognize that without Moses they would have died in the
desert, and they fear being without him.

It is their desire to replace Moses because they had made him into a
god. Their idolatry was directed toward a man, and not the one true god
at all.

It is ludicrous for them to think that a calf was the God who brought
them up from Egypt. Their reversionism has taken them to irrationality.

In Ex 32, verses 714, Moses beseeches God to withhold from destroying
the nation of Israel for their idolatry, and the Lord assents.

Moses then descended from the mountain with the tablets of the Law in
his arms, he first hears and then sees the idolatrous feast. He is so
angry that he dashes the tablets on the rocks at the foot of the
mountain. They are utterly shattered. Next he melted down the golden
calf, ground it into powder, and scattered the powder over the surface
of the water. He made the people drink that water. All this from verses
1520.

Moses then turns to Aaron, whom he left in command before he went up on
the mountain. Aaron’s reply is one for the books. Verses 2124, “Then
Moses said to Aaron, ‘What did this people do to you, that you have
brought such great sin upon them?’ And Aaron said, ‘Do not let the anger
of my lord burn you know the people yourself, that they are prone to
evil. For they said to me, ’Make a god for us who will go before us; for
this Moses, the man who brought us up from Egypt, we do not know what
has become of him.’ And I said to them, ‘Whoever has any gold, let them
tear it off.’ So they gave it to me, and I threw it into the fire, and
out came this calf.’”

Aaron first attempts the blame the people for his failure in leadership.

Second, he fabricates the story of the manufacture of the calf. He
implies that the calf is from God Himself by telling of its miraculous
production.

As a memorial, the broken tablets of the law were placed inside of the
ark of the covenant. In spite of this failure, the covenant would
continue, covered by the mercy seat of God.

AARON’S ROD

Numbers 17.

In Numbers chapter 16, the rebellion of Korah is recorded. It resulted
in the death of 14,700 Israelites by plague.

At the conclusion of the rebellion, there was a great need to reaffirm
the authority of Aaron.

Therefore, God conceived a test which the Israelites could perform, so
that His choice of Aaron could be made clear to them.

Num 17:17, “Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, ‘Speak to the sons of
Israel, and get from them a rod for each father’s household: twelve
rods, from all their leaders according to their father’s households. You
shall write each name on his rod, and write Aaron’s name on the rod of
Levi; for there is one rod for the head of each of their father’s
households. You shall then deposit them in the tent of meeting in front
of the testimony, where I meet with you. And it will come about that the
rod of the man whom I choose will sprout. Thus I shall lessen from upon
Myself the grumblings of the sons of Israel, who are grumbling against
you.’ Moses therefore spoke to the sons of Israel and all their leaders
gave him a rod apiece, for each leader according to their fathers’
households, twelve rods, with the rod of Aaron among their rods. So
Moses deposited the rods before the Lord in the tent of the testimony.”

Of course, Aaron’s rod budded, and thus was his authority established,
verses 811.

Aaron’s rod that budded was placed into the ark of the covenant to
remind the people of the rebellion of Korah, and the importance of
following their divinely appointed rulers.

The covenant continued in spite of the failure, because the sin was
covered by the mercy seat.

THE WATERS OF MERIBAH

Exodus 17:17; Numbers 20:213.

This is the real third test which Christ received in the wilderness. It
was the reason that the people were not allowed to enter the promised
land.

At Meribah, the people became thirsty, and demanded that God bring them
water.

They had been without water for one day. They were uncomfortable, but
not dying.

Because of this thirst, they put the Lord to the test. They demanded
that He prove His deity by giving them water. This was the last straw,
and so the punishment came.

THE TESTS OF CHRIST: two fast balls and a curve.

Test one: the logistics test.

**Matt 4:24**, “And after He had fasted forty days and forty nights, He
finally became hungry. And the tempter said to Him, ‘If you are the Son
of God, command that these stones become bread.’ But He answered and
said, ‘It is written, ’Man shall not live on bread alone, but on every
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God’’”

***ne.steusas*** is the verb that is translated fasting. It describes
complete abstinence from food. The culminative aorist tense concentrates
on the end of the fasting.

***husteron*** is used as an adverb to emphasize that Christ was not
ordinary man. It is translated ‘finally’.

Luke 4:2-4, “And He ate absolutely nothing during those days; and at the
concluding of them, He hungered. And the devil said to Him, ‘If You are
the Son of God, speak to this stone that it might become bread.’ And
Jesus answered him, ‘It is written, ’Man shall not live on bread
alone.’”

The combination of ***ouk*** and ***ouden*** places an absolute negation
on the verb ***ephagen***.

The preposition ***en*** plus the phrase ***tais heme.rais ekeinais***
shows that the negation lasts for the entire forty days.

The aorist participle ***suntelestheiso.n*** indicates that it was only
at the very conclusion of the forty days that He became hungry. The verb
***peinao*** describes an obsessive hunger, where all that is thought of
is food. It is not just the growling of the stomach. After forty days,
even the healthiest human being is at the limits of his endurance. So
was Christ.

The imperative mood of the aorist verb ***eipe*** shows a command to the
stone.

The subjunctive mood of ***ginomai*** reveals that it all depends on
Christ’s volition. The devil knows that the Divine Power is available,
but that its use would invalidate the purpose of the incarnation.

Matthew says stones plural instead of stone singular from Luke. This
difficulty is resolved by applying the principle of plurality. Each
recital is correct; there was more than one instance of temptation.
Matthew records one of these, while Luke the other. It is likely that
Luke records the latter of the two, because of Christ’s abbreviated
reply. This could not be resolved by applying the principle of
translation.

When you put these two together, they form an interesting narrative that
describes an ongoing temptation. In the later temptation His Scriptural
reply is abbreviated, as though He is at the very end of His endurance,
or because it is not necessary to repeat the whole thing.

This test relates to the logistical test of Israel:

The Israelites had something to eat every day. Manna was the world’s
greatest health food. It was the same thing, but it was something.

Christ had nothing to eat for forty days and forty nights. Therefore,
His test was far greater than what they endured. He ate the same thing
every day: Nothing.

Placing the manna inside the ark of the covenant foreshadowed this test
of our Lord. It commemorated Christ’s victory in the desert, and it
looked forward to the redemption of this failure at the cross, as
represented by the mercy seat.

The essence of the temptation had to do with the temptation to use His
divine attributes or rely on what God provided His humanity.

To use His divine capability of omnipotence to turn the stones to bread
would violate the principle of kenosis; to do so would destroy divine
character.

The very reason for the incarnation would have been undermined and
destroyed had Christ given in here. The cross and the Christian way of
life would have instantly become meaningless.

Christ used only what God provided His humanity to resist this
temptation. Three grace assets are pertinent:

The human spirit, or spiritual conscience, which was Christ’s frame of
reference for spiritual matters.

The power of God the Holy Spirit related to the perception and recall of
the word.

The Word itself, at the time only the Old Testament canon.

Note that Christ quotes from Deuteronomy 8:3.

The context of this verse is Moses’ final exhortation to the children of
Israel before their occupation of the promised land.

All three of Christ’s replies will come from this speech.

These three things denote readiness for the blessings of the land of
milk and honey:

First, there is worship of the one true God and abstinence from
idolatry. This is personal love for God.

Second, there is humble acceptance of the circumstances of your life,
good or bad, and acceptance of delegated human authority, good or bad.

Third, there is a devotion to the word of Truth, and acceptance of God’s
logistical grace.

This scripture was originally learned and inculcated by Christ, probably
at a very young age.

At this appropriate time, the Spirit recalled this passage into Christ’s
spiritual frame of reference, His human spirit. Christ instantly
understood the issue.

Now the issue remained: Would He apply what had been recalled? The
answer is of course. He even quotes the passage directly to the devil.

#### Deut 8:1-10

Test two: the idolatry test.

**Matthew 4:8-10**, “Again, the devil is taking Him alongside to an
exceptionally high mountain, and showing Him all the kingdoms of the
world, and their glory; and He said to Him, ‘All these things will I
give you, if falling down you might worship me.’ Then Jesus said to him,
‘Begone, Satan! For it is written, ’You shall worship the Lord your God,
and serve Him only.’”

***paralambano*** means to take alongside. This verb has a wide
connotation which seems to harmonize well with the situation. It means
to take someone into your home as a guest; to take someone aside for the
purpose of private instruction or reproof; to take someone alongside for
purpose of helping them; and in the legal context to take someone into
custody. This is the perfect word for this situation, because you can
see the enemy taking Christ alongside as a used car salesman does. The
historical present is used to emphasize the drama of the moment.

***lian*** emphasizes the great height of this mountain; perhaps it was
even Mt. Everest or Mt. Ararat…

***deiknumi*** means to show or demonstrate something to someone. This
too is in the historical present.

The aorist participle ***peso.n*** demonstrates that the falling down
must precede the distribution of the kingdoms and their glory.

The subjunctive mood of the verb ***proskune.se.s*** indicates that it
is up to Christ; He must exercise His will freely in this matter. The
verb depicts the kissing of another’s feet, and comes with the idea of
sycophantic flourish before a deified king.

**Luke 4:5-8**, “And he led Him up and showed Him all the kingdoms of
the world in a moment of time. And the devil said to Him, ‘I will give
You all this domain and its glory; for it has been handed over to me,
and I give it to whomever I wish. Therefore if You worship before me, it
shall all be Yours.’ And Jesus answered and said to him, ‘It is written,
’You shall worship the Lord your God and serve Him only.’”

Luke uses the word ***oikoumene.s*** for world. It bears closer to the
meaning of ‘establishment’, or ‘corporation’. This contrasts with the
straightforward ***kosmos*** of Matthew.

Luke adds that the show occurred in one moment of time. Ahem, he did not
want Christ to look too closely. This from ***stigme. chronou***, a
point of chronological time.

***exousia*** denotes that Christ would be given delegated authority
from Satan over all these kingdoms, along with the glory of them. Let me
point out that the glory of the devil’s world is only a veneer.

The enemy did not receive the kingdoms of the world because of
meritorious service. He deceived Adam, and received the authority
because of Adam’s irresponsible sin.

This temptation is recorded by both Matthew and Luke, who write and
cover it thoroughly between them. There is only one instance of
temptation here.

We will accept Luke’s order of events here, because they are more
logical, and Luke tends to be very chronological in his narrative, while
Matthew is topical.

All of the kingdoms of the world would belong to Christ at the right
time, and only when His chosen people would accept Him as the Messiah.

This particular condition was not yet fulfilled, and in fact the early
indicators were not looking good.

In other words, this was attacking Christ at a potential weak spot. The
greatness of the world made the temptation all the more agonizing.

That Christ would continue in poverty for the rest of his life is a
testimony to his fantastic resolve.

Part of this test had to do with timing, and part of with idolatry. It
harkens back to the failure of the golden calf.

Christ’s solution to this problem comes from Deut 6:13. Note that the
blessings of the Promised Land are neither earned nor deserved. Yet they
are given freely by God.

The offer from Satan is something similar, but infinitely less because
of the object of worship. The satisfaction that comes from a
relationship with God is so great as to add to one’s appreciation and
enjoyment of the attendant blessings. In the worship of idols, all the
things turn to dust.

Christ applies the perfect passage for this specific temptation, another
great testimony to the work of the Spirit and the level of inculcation
that Christ has reached.

Again Christ solves the problem through the Holy Spirit, the Word, and
His human spirit. These same three grace assets are available to us as
church age believers.

In this case kenosis is not as much an issue, because Christ is not
directly tempted to use His capabilities to solve the problem.

The authority/putting God to the test.

**Matthew 4:5-7**, “Then the devil took Him alongside into the holy
city; and he stood Him on the pinnacle of the temple, and said to Him,
‘If you are the Son of God throw Yourself down; for it is written, ’He
will give His angels charge concerning You.’ And, ‘On their hands they
will bear You up, lest You strike your foot against a stone.’ Jesus said
to him, ‘On the other hand, it is written, ’You shall not put the Lord
your God to the test.’’”

***paralambano*** is used again by Matthew to describe the sleazy
operation of the enemy. This polite word is used to outline an insidious
temptation.

***entello*** is the word used to indicate the giving of responsibility
to the angels. It is in the future tense because it depends on a past
condition in the context of Psalm 91.

***palin*** is used by Christ to express His contradiction of the
assertion of Satan. palin means back; again; it is an adverb. Here it
takes on the meaning of contradiction. It returns to Scripture, where
Satan has just taken the conversation, and contradicts what has just
been said.

**Luke 4:9-12**, “And he led Him to Jerusalem and stood Him upon the
pinnacle of the temple, and said to Him, ‘If You are the Son of God,
throw Yourself down from here; for it is written, ’He will give His
angels charge concerning You to guard You,’ and, ‘On their hands they
will bear You up, Lest You strike Your foot against a stone.’‘And Jesus
answered and said to hi, ’It is said, ’You shall not put the Lord your
God to the test.’’”

This test has many levels:

There is a temptation to verify His own Messiahship by jumping down from
the temple; from this it appears to be about Aaron’s rod that budded.

There is a necessity for Christ to see if the verse quoted by Satan is
right and if it applies here.

If it does not apply, then Christ must rely on the Spirit to provide Him
with the right Scripture.

This is also a temptation to use the privileges of His own deity ‘If you
are the Son of God.’ kenosis comes back into play here.

Note that in this test the enemy is using Scripture against Christ. It
is an oft used ploy, and it seldom fails. This points out the necessity
for a prepared pastor.

The enemy quotes Psalm 91 in the temptation. Verses 11 and 12 are quoted
but taken out of context.

This Psalm is about trust in God, and how God responds to those who love
Him.

Especially pertinent is the conditional clause of verse 9: “If you make
the most high your dwelling” This means that the following verses depend
on the fulfillment of this condition.

Christ could not demand that God send his angels to cushion up his fall…
that would be putting God to the test, as what happened in the
wilderness at the waters of Meribah.

This test appears to be about the establishment of Christ’s earthly
authority. A good miracle in front of thousands of temple worshippers
including the most important men in Israel would well establish Christ’s
authority among the Jews.

How soon they forget. Christ was only forty days before the object of
the triple miracle of His baptism. The heavens split open; the voice of
God spoke; the Spirit descended in the form of a dove. Yet this miracle,
probably in front of those same leaders who were now below in the temple
court, did not convince the people to follow Christ.

The spiritual gift of miracles would establish Christ’s authority at the
proper time. This was not that time. The gift of miracles functions
under the sovereignty of the Spirit so that He chooses the time the
place and the miracle to be performed.

The devil is trying to promote Christ before God. The devil is
attempting to foist onto Christ an Aaron’s rod that budded scenario. He
is attempting to do so by quoting Scripture that sounds right.

Christ rightfully sorts this one out, and quotes Deuteronomy 6:16. The
full passage through verse 19 goes like this: “Do not test the Lord your
God as you did at Massah. Be sure to keep the commands of the Lord your
God and the stipulations and decrees he has given you. Do what is right
and good in the Lord’s sight, so that it may go well with you and you
may go in and take over the good land that the Lord promised on oath to
your forefathers, thrusting out all your enemies before you as the Lord
said.”

Again this is a quote from Moses final speech in preparation for the
second generation to enter the promised land.

This time it was done right by Christ. He passed the tests that Israel
failed.

In a completely appropriate way, the three items in the ark of the
covenant represent both the failure of Israel and the triumph of Christ.

Christ not only paid for our sins, but He also produced the
righteousness which would be imputed to us at salvation.

In producing that righteousness Christ established a way of solving
problems which He would leave as a heritage for all church age
believers.

That way was total dependence on the grace assets of God.

Christ’s testing in the desert was intense, subtle, and could only be
passed through dependence on the grace assets.

These three tests fall into three general categories: Provision,
prosperity, and promotion.

These three tests were temptations to Christ in three categories:

The temptation to use divine power and violate the principle of kenosis.

The temptation to forsake a great relationship with God for direct
worship of Satan.

The temptation to put God to the test.

Putting God to the test.

You put God to the test when you demand Him to reveal Himself in some
way that benefits you.

The issue is motive. The issue is self promotion.

You are not promoted until God promotes you.

You are not a success until you succeed according to the standards of
the Word of God.

Real promotion and success depend on your fulfillment of the plan of
God.

You can only fulfill the plan of God through the implementation of the
victorious ideology.

The conclusion of the tests.

**Matt 4:11**, “Then the devil left Him; and behold, angels came and
began to minister to Him.”

**Mark 1:13**, “and the angels were ministering to Him.”

**Luke 4:13**, “And when the devil had finished every temptation, he
departed from Him until an opportune time.”

Jesus’ First Followers
----------------------

**John 1:35-51** (translation), "Again the next day John was standing
with two of his disciples,

“and he looked upon Jesus as He walked, and said, ’Behold, the Lamb of
God!”

"And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.

"And Jesus turned, and beheld them following, and said to them, ‘What do
you seek?’ And they said to Him, ‘Rabbi [which translated means
Teacher], where are you staying?’

"He said to them, ‘Come, and you will see.’ They came therefore and saw
where He was staying; and they stayed with Him that day, for it was
about the tenth hour.

"One of the two who heard John speak, and followed Him, was Andrew,
Simon Peter’s brother.

"He found first his own brother Simon, and said to him, ‘We have found
the Messiah’ [which translated means Christ].

"He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at him, and said, ‘You are Simon
the son of John; you shall be called Cephas’ [which translated means
Peter].

"The next day He purposed to go forth into Galilee, and He found Philip.
And Jesus said to him, ‘Follow Me’.

"Now Philip was from Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter.

"Philip found Nathaniel and said to him, ‘We have found Him of whom
Moses in the Law and also the Prophets wrote, Jesus of Nazareth, the son
of Joseph.’

"And Nathaniel said to him, ‘Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?’
Philip said to him, ‘Come and see.’

"Jesus saw Nathaniel coming to Him, and said of him, ‘Behold, an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!’

"Nathaniel said to Him, ‘How do you know me?’ Jesus answered and said to
him, ‘Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw
you.’

"Nathaniel answered Him, ‘Rabbi You are the Son of God; You are the King
of Israel.’

"Jesus answered and said to him, ‘Because I said to you that I saw you
under the fig tree, do you believe? You shall see greater things than
these.’

“And He said to him, ‘Truly, truly, I say to you, you shall see the
heavens opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the
Son of Man.’”

John the Baptist knows Jesus already; they are cousins according to the
flesh. So when he sees the Messiah, he points Him out to the two
disciples he is with. He calls Jesus the “Lamb of God.” This is a
reference to the Passover feast.

### The Passover and Unleavened Bread

The Documentation. Ex 12:320; Lev 23:6; Deut 16:18; Num 28:1625.

#### The Procedure.

A lamb without spot or blemish is slain by the head of each family.

The blood from the lamb is sprinkled with hyssop on the top of the
doorframe.

The lamb is roasted and then consumed with bitter herbs by the father
and his family.

After Jerusalem was established, the Passover was to be celebrated only
there.

For the week following the Passover feast only unleavened bread would be
eaten.

On each of the seven days the Levitical priest would sacrifice 2
bullocks, 1 ram, 7 lambs, and 1 goat.

On the second day an offering of barley was made. This was the first
harvest fruits of the year.

The Sabbath was observed on the first and last days of the feast, but
the entire week was treated as a Sabbath with reference to work. Only
work for food preparation was allowed.

#### The interpretation.

The wilderness journey.

This feast represented the Exodus from Egypt.

The Passover represents the night before the departure of the Israelites
from Egypt, Exo 12.

The blood on the doorframe was a sign to God to pass over that house.
All other houses would have the firstborn of all men and animals killed
by God.

ii. The eating of the lamb would be the last meat eaten before the
journey to the promised land.

iii. The bitter herbs represented the bitterness of the slavery of the
Israelites in Egypt.

The unleavened bread represented the hurry in which the Jews had to
leave. They did not have time for the yeast to rise.

The observation of the Sabbath was a reminder to set apart time for the
Lord, so that one would be spiritually prepared for the wilderness
journey.

All together, these things represent the beginning of every believer’s
relationship with God: the moment of belief in Christ.

The believer leaves behind all that he has in the way of pride and human
good in order to take hold of salvation in Christ.

The promised land still lies ahead. This is the hope of spiritual
maturity and its blessings.

The rituals.

The sacrifice of the lamb was a preview of the saving work of Christ on
the cross. The lamb was without spot or blemish, which was the status of
Christ at the virgin birth. This called to mind the righteousness,
justice, love, mercy, grace, and flexible proficiency of God.

The eating of the whole lamb represented the necessity of total belief
in Jesus Christ for salvation.

The priests sacrificing the animals provide a backdrop for the truth of
the feast. These were burnt offerings.

The sacrifice of 7 lambs per day displayed the perfect work of God.

ii. The sacrifice of the ram each day was a reminder that this was the
sacrifice of God’s Son. It harkened back to Abraham’s near sacrifice of
Isaac.

iii. The sacrifice of the goat each day was a reminder that Jesus Christ
was the scapegoat for the entire human race.

iv. The sacrifice of the two bullocks per day represented the prosperity
which comes from a relationship with God. The bullock was a sign of
prosperity and the means to prosperity, for it was a beast of burden.
Ownership of two bullocks was considered prosperity in ancient Israel.

The sacrifice of the barley was a giving of the first-fruits of the
harvest, and it was given in thanksgiving for logistical grace. It
called to mind the faithfulness of God.

The unleavened bread represents the status of Christ on the cross. There
is no sin whatsoever in Christ, just as unleavened bread has no yeast.

The daily sacrifices were to remind the Jews of the importance of their
relationship with God. They put an exclamation point onto the other
activities of the feast.

The Temple.

The daily sacrifices were made by the priests at the brazen altar in the
outer court of the Temple or tabernacle.

This represents the righteousness of Christ ascending up to God the
Father in the smoke of the burnt offering.

The copper of the altar represented judgment, and specifically the
judgment of Christ in our place on the cross.

New Testament.

Christ spoke of his relationship to the Passover at the last supper. Mat
26:26-30, “While they were eating, Jesus took bread, gave thanks and
broke it, and gave it to his disciples, saying,”Take and eat; this is my
body." {27} Then he took the cup, gave thanks and offered it to them,
saying, “Drink from it, all of you. {28} This is my blood of the
covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins. {29}
I tell you, I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on until
that day when I drink it anew with you in my Father’s kingdom.” {30}
When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives."

Paul used the unleavened bread to illustrated the church without the bad
influence of those in the cosmic system. 1 Cor 5:7, “Get rid of the old
yeast that you may be a new batch without yeast as you really are. For
Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed. Therefore let us keep
the Festival, not with the old yeast, the yeast of malice and
wickedness, but with bread without yeast, the bread of sincerity and
truth.”

In other words, Christ was the fulfillment of the Passover. John knew
that Christ was about the redemption of sins; that was the nature of his
own baptizing ministry.

The two disciples follow Jesus, because He is the Messiah, and greater
than John. This is not too difficult a decision to make.

They use a respectful form of address, Rabbi.’ They recognize that Jesus
has the authority of a teacher of the Law, and therefore a Jewish
authority. This would certainly miff the Pharisees and Scribes in the
days and years to come.

These two disciples want to know where Jesus is staying. This is
tantamount to proclaiming that they are with Him now; they want to
follow Him wherever He will go. They are through with John.

Andrew went and found Peter; there is not much more that Scripture has
to say about Andrew, but this of course was something very good. A lot
has been said about this kind of ministry; deservedly so. Even the timid
can have great impact simply by repeating the act of Andrew in their own
way. It is a simple kind of thing: “I have found the Messiah; come see
for yourself.”

Jesus calls Simon CEPHAS, which is translated PETROS. They mean rock.’
He would be the foundation rock of the early church.

Bartholomew is the name mentioned in the synoptic gospels. This means
‘Son of Ptolemies" Since this is only a last name it is not specific as
to the actual person behind it. It also may be interpreted ’Son of
Ptolemais’, a city on the North Coast of Palestine, not too far from
Galilee. In modern parlance, ‘the guy from Ptolemais’.

John uses Nathaniel, the man’s first name. The Ptolemies were the royal
family in Egypt, and major players in the events following the death of
Alexander the Great in 323 B.C. and the building of the Roman Empire.
The most famous of all the Ptolemies was none other than Cleopatra of
Egypt.

Bartholomew/Nathaniel exhibits an elitist attitude toward Nazareth that
could come from being part of a royal family, or simply from a
neighboring town.

It is interesting to note that Christ says of Nathaniel, “a real
Israelite”. The word ‘real’ is translated from the adverb
***ale.thino.s***. This adverb is one of emphasis on true nature. But
Nathaniel Bartholomew is of Egyptian heritage he could not be a genetic
Jew. But Christ talks about his spiritual heritage as Paul would… that
the true Jew is the one who believes in Him regardless of his genetic
make up.

Christ also comments that Nathaniel is without guile, or cunning deceit.
Another way to put it is that Nathaniel is very forthright; he says what
he thinks. Nathaniel is a straight shooter with his words, as he has
just demonstrated with his comment on Nazareth.

Nathaniel’s response to Christ’s statement is surprise and disbelief.
“How do you know me?” Christ responds, “Before Philip called you, when
you were under the fig tree, I saw you.” We do not know what Nathaniel
was doing under the fig tree, but it was certainly related to his
forthright nature.

On the basis of Christ’s simple statement, Nathaniel believes. It is now
Christ’s turn to register surprise.

On account of Nathaniel’s belief, Christ prophesies: ‘You will see the
heavens opened , and the angels of God ascending and descending on the
Son of Man.’ This is a reference to behind the scenes of prayer. Taking
the prayers to God, and returning the answers to man. However, this is a
literal vision, and so Nathaniel will have the gift of seeing behind the
scenes of prayer.

The Wedding at Cana of Galilee
------------------------------

Cana was a town in Galilee, due west of the Sea of Galilee and north of
Nazareth, about halfway between the two.

The ancient Jewish wedding ceremony would go like this:

There were typically many attendants to the bride and groom. The groom
would select a friend to be his best man.

The weddings were often held in the fall, after the harvest, so that the
maximum number of people could attend. Relatives would travel relatively
far to attend.

The bride was transferred to the house of the bridegroom’s father in a
wonderful, boisterous, fun parade. Flowers were scattered, songs were
sung. A procession of virgins accompanied the bridegroom.

A feast took place, which could last as long as a week. This
traditionally began in the evening.

Riddles were told.

Love songs were sung, usually the words of the Song of Solomon were set
to music for this.

A cloak or skirt was spread over the bride which represented the marital
commitment. This was the high point of the feast.

The ceremony would seldom have the presence of a government official or
priest.

Friends and relatives recited Biblical passages or quoted historical
wisdom as the couple stood before them.

After this the couple was left alone to consummate their marriage in a
room specially prepared by friends and relatives. While the consummation
took place the party outside continued.

Later the couple would emerge from the consummation room with evidence
of the woman’s virginity on a piece of cloth.

#### The Text, John 2:1-11

**John 2:1**, “And a wedding began on the third day in Kana of Galilee,
and the mother of Jesus was there.”

This third day is really one week’s time since Christ returned from the
wilderness.

Day one has the testimony of John the Baptist to the Levites, John
1:1928. This occurs at Bethany beyond the Jordan.

The next day Christ comes back from the desert, and arrives at Bethany
where John remains with his disciples, John 1:2934.

The day after that Christ calls His first disciples, Andrew, an unnamed
disciple, and Simon Peter, Andrew’s brother, John 1:3542.

On the fourth day, Philip and Nathaniel Bartholomew are called, John
1:4351.

Three days later, Christ is in Kana, about three days walk from Bethany
beyond the Jordan.

Christ’s mother, Mary was present at this feast.

Now if Mary was very young when she gave birth to Christ, then she would
be middle aged by now somewhere in her forties.

Since the birth of Christ and her tremendous display of maturity during
that period we have seen her but once. That time was the time that
Joseph and Mary took Christ to the Passover in Jerusalem. At that event,
Mary displayed a fair amount of immaturity.

Since that event, Mary has given birth to other children through Joseph,
and raised them.

She has apparently also been widowed, since the Passover event is the
last time that Joseph appears on the radar screen.

**John 2:2**. “Now indeed Jesus was called into the wedding, and His
disciples.”

The ascensive use of the conjunction ***kai*** is translated indeed.
This betrays some surprise on the part of the writer. Although Mary was
already present at this feast, it was unusual for others to be invited
while the festivities were in full swing.

The passive voice of the verb ***ekle.the***. reveals that Christ was
polite. He did not barge in, but he was called. The passive voice shows
us that Christ did not produce the action of the calling, someone else
did.

The use of the conjunction ***eis*** indicates that he was outside of
the wedding, an uninvited guest.

The third person singular of the verb ***ekle.the***. shows us that only
Christ at first is called in; His disciples are left outside. This
further indicates that Christ was called in because Mary was His mother
not because of His celebrityship. The fact that John mentions Mary’s
presence supports this.

The conjunction ***kai*** plus the phrase ***hoi mathetai*** autou
reveals that the extension of the invitation to the disciples was more
of an afterthought.

Although this was a large Jewish wedding the addition of five or six
more people would have placed a pretty serious burden on the wedding
logistics. The Bride’s father would have to pay for the consumption of
food and drink by the disciples. Furthermore, these things were planned
carefully according to how many guests were attending. Six more would
have strained the limits of that plan.

**John 2:3**. “And the wine having failed, Jesus’ mother says to
him,”They have no wine".

So Mary has a firm grasp of the obvious. There is more to this verse
than that.

John dramatized this moment, and not because Mary was speaking. The
failure of the wine would have been a serious impediment to the
celebration. If this was only midweek in the celebration, it would have
been a social disaster.

This moment is dramatized by the use of the dramatic or historical
present tense of the verb legei to speak.

The focus of the disaster is revealed by the position of the participle
***husteresantos***.

This participle is in the genitive absolute. This shows a grammatical
disconnection with the rest of the statement in the verse. It shows that
although Mary made the statement, she really had no idea why this had
happened.

It is extremely likely that the wine failed due to the presence of six
additional guests Jesus and His disciples. It also means that Jesus and
His disciples were helping the wine shortage along by drinking along
with the other guests. It does not imply drunkenness on their part. They
did the polite thing.

Mary’s statement is one which is pregnant with meaning. She is verbally
elbowing her son. Hey, this was a bad situation.

Mary’s verbal elbowing has to do with the deity of her Son. She more
than anyone else knows that He is the King of Kings and Lord of Lords.
She wants Him to use His deity to solve this problem.

There is no record of any miracle occurring from the hand of Jesus
before this one. Christ has only just received the filling ministry of
the Spirit at His baptism, which would have included the gift of
miracles.

Therefore, Mary is not working from precedent here. She has not seen
Christ do this before. Her concentration is not on the spiritual gift of
miracles, which has yet to function; it is on the deity of Jesus Christ.

Though Mary does not have a clue as to why the wine has failed, it was
most likely very obvious to Christ.

Though Mary only sees a quick solution to a social disaster, Christ sees
much more. His responsibility in the doctrine of kenosis. Mary misses
the point badly.

**John 2:4**. “And Jesus says to her,”What is to me and you, ma’am? My
hour has not come."

Again John uses the dramatic or historic present to make the scene
vivid. Again this is done with the verb ***legei***, ‘to speak’.

Our Lord uses a Hebrew idiom to make it clear to His mother that He now
has His own realm of authority.

The idiom is literally from the Greek phrase ***Ti emoi kai soi***.
“What is to me and you?.”

Christ very clearly says in this idiom, “Mind your own business.”

What is amazing here is that Christ has just finished with the severe
tests in the wilderness, and two of the three at least attempt to get
Him to do the same thing that His mother is attempting here.

So Christ has to set the boundaries of His own authority with His
mother. This is His affair, and not hers.

Christ uses a formal term for woman in the vocative case to gain the
attention of His mother. ***gune***. translates best as ‘ma’am’, or
‘lady’. It can be a term of affection, and is almost always a term of
respect, but it is formal, and it shows the objective way that Christ is
addressing His mother. He is reproving her, after all.

Christ used this same term as He was dying on the cross. John 19:26
says, “Ma’am, behold your Son.” There, it is definitely a term of
respect and affection.

Christ then makes the issue clear: His hour has not yet come.

This hour does not refer to the hour of His kingdom ministry, for that
ministry was most certainly in action even at that time.

The baptism of John was the official beginning of the kingdom ministry;
from that time Christ had the filling ministry of the Spirit, and the
spoken authority from God.

Christ has gathered the first of His disciples, who will be instrumental
to His kingdom pronouncement.

The kingdom ministry was designed to introduce the millennial kingdom
and its king to the people of Israel.

The kingdom ministry is not synonymous with the reign of the king. The
reign of the king will include the full revelation and implementation of
His Godly powers and character.

The hour when He can reveal and use His deity has not come, and He must
make that clear to His own mother.

The hour of Christ’s glorification can only come when He is accepted by
the chosen nation, Israel. So far, that acceptance has not come.

Alva J. McClain has suggested six reasons for the Israelite rejection of
Christ in his fine theological work, The Greatness of the Kingdom. They
are just as valid today as they ever were.

The high spiritual requirements our Lord laid down as essential for
entrance into the kingdom (Mk 1:15; Lk 18:1517; John 3:35).

His refusal to establish a kingdom merely social and political in
character (Lk 12:1330; John 6:515).

His denunciation of the current religion with its traditionalism,
legalism, and ritualism (Lk 11:3754).

His scathing arraignment of the ruling classes (Matt 23).

His association with and compassion for the outcasts of Israel (Matt
9:1013; Lk 15:1,2).

His exalted claims for Himself (John 5:1618; 10:2433; 18:37).

**John 2:5**. “His mother says to the servants, ‘Do whatever this one
says to you.’”

Now it appears that Christ’s mother keeps steaming straight ahead in
spite of the rebuke of her Son. But this is not the case.

She says, poisate the imperative second person plural of the verb
poieo., ‘to do’. This is a command, but the direct object of the command
is ti an ‘whatever’. The indefinite particle an leaves the command wide
open to the authority of Jesus Christ.

The whatever can mean that Christ tells them nothing.

The whatever can mean that Christ will give money and tell them to head
to the nearest liquor store.

Or the whatever can mean that Christ will rely on the Father and the
Spirit to solve the problem.

Although the possibility exists for the presence of some contempt in
this statement, it is much more likely that it is a straightforward
statement of complete humility.

Mary takes the rebuke of her Son with great self esteem, and recovers in
a matter of moments so that she is completely humble when it is her turn
to speak next.

**John 2:6**. “Now there were six stone water jars according to the
custom of the Jews for purification, each containing two or three
metretai.”

This verse is purely explanatory by nature. It sets the stage for the
narrative to follow.

A metretai was about ten gallons. This gives us an idea of the great
size of this wedding and just how much wine was being consumed. 20 or 30
gallons times six makes it 120 to 180 gallons of wine that Christ was
going to make.

These stone water jars were there to hold water for dishwashing and
handwashing. In other words, they were there for common, sanitary usage.
The water, though sanitary and no doubt potable, was a grade below that
which is drinking water.

It was the Jewish custom to wash hands and dishes both before and after
meals. A large volume of water would be needed for such a task.

If Christ was going to turn all of this water into wine, it would
provide enough for perhaps a hundred guests over the course of several
days. Perhaps this wedding was still in its early stages, but it is more
likely that the wine was intended to be too much; not to tempt everyone
to over drink to a state of inebriation, but instead to symbolize the
overflowing nature of the plan of God and the millennial kingdom.

David had said some thousand years before this event, “My cup runneth
over.” This is certainly evidence of that very thing.

Joel 2:24 contains a messianic and millennial prophecy that catches this
same symbology, “And the vats will overflow with the new wine and oil.”

How appropriate that this first miracle should be so very millennial.

The wine offering of the feast of first-fruits represented the
prosperity that would come from the appropriation of grace provision for
spiritual life. The feast itself celebrated the law giving at Mt. Sinai.

**John 2:7**. “Jesus says to them, ‘Fill the water pots with water.’ And
they filled them to the top.”

Now Christ gives a direct command it is the imperative mood of the verb
***gemizo*** to fill.

The verb itself always takes the negative connotation ‘Full of
wickedness’; ‘Full of smoke’. It is even used of the seven plague and
the abominations of Revelation.

This negative connotation is related to the usual base purpose of the
water jars.

The jars are to be full of dishwater, not pure, clear drinking water.

This dishwater is a good symbol for the world, and the Christian’s
involvement in it. You really do not want to partake of it, but it is
used by God to make us clean such is the role of the undeserved
suffering that is so often a part of living in the devil’s world.

So Christ wrinkles His nose when he orders the servants to fill the jars
with water. He is setting up a really striking contrast by using a verb
of distaste.

The forthcoming miracle is really going to be a strong contrast and
wonderful surprise.

**John 2:8**. “And He says to them, ‘Draw it now and take [it] to the
headwaiter.’ And they took [it].”

This reveals that Christ knew beforehand just what had happened to the
dishwater.

The previous verse shows Christ’s premeditation; this one shows its
execution.

Now Christ was doing this by the spiritual gift of miracles.

A spiritual gift is a part of the human spirit, the spiritual frame of
reference in the soul.

A spiritual gift is given by the sovereignty God the Holy Spirit. It
only operates under His initiative.

This passage tells us much about that gift.

That the one doing the miracle has full knowledge of the intent of the
Spirit.

That the one doing the miracle participates fully in the execution of
the miracle itself.

That it takes a lot of doctrine to appreciate what the Spirit is doing
in the substance of the miracle.

That miracles contained great symbolism and drew their meaning from the
substance of the miracle accomplished. They are thus a reflection of the
order of God.

Christ could not have done this miracle on the initiative of His own
deity; such would violate the principle of kenosis, and such a violation
would invalidate the entire incarnation.

Christ voluntarily restricted the independent use of His own divine
attributes during the incarnation.

**John 2:9**. “Now as the chief steward tasted the water which had
become wine and had not known where it came from (but the servants who
had drawn the water had known) the chief steward loudly summoned the
bridegroom.”

This is a very convoluted verse that is an explanation that must explain
itself.

John is revealing the miracle here, but he deems it appropriate to
explain the reaction to it from the viewpoint of the chief wine steward.
The scene is intended to be comic.

The chief steward is like a *maitre d’hotel* at a fancy restaurant. He
knows all the protocol, all of the details concerning a wedding feast.
The perfect timing, the perfect food, etc. The bridegroom would leave
the details to this man so that he could concentrate on his bride. You
can imagine that these men were quite stuffy, persnickety to the
extreme, and very demanding. You can also imagine this man fretting as
the wine ran out “What shall we do?” Yet here comes the servants with a
20 gallon stone jar full of wine. They are saved from disgrace! They
need not hear the dreaded words… “You’ll never work in this town again.”
But the steward has standards, and he must taste the wine. In this pinch
anything but pure vinegar will do…

Now this chief steward ‘tasted’ the wine. This verb is geuomai, which
fits well into the picture of winetasting. It means to savor, or relish
something by taste. To really enjoy any experience.

John goes out of his way to make it clear that the steward did not know
the source of the wine, although the servants did. It is the secret that
the servants hold; you can see their hidden, silly smiles, and their
mental giggling. The fretting, ruined chief steward is saved from
certain social death, and he does not yet know.

Now the chief steward tastes the wine, and he immediately reverts to
that unique form of snob degeneracy that only chief stewards and maitre
d’hotels can express. Without delay he calls the bridegroom. He is so
amazed with what he considers a blunder on the part of the bridegroom
that he violates one of his own rules.

The verb ***phoneo*** is used to denote that the chief steward uses a
loud call in order to summon. The verb is used of the trumpet blast, the
rolling thunder, the voice of John the Baptist in the wilderness, the
shout of the archangel at the second coming, and even the voice of God.
This guy is not whispering.

He is calling to reprove the bridegroom because this great wine had
remained hidden until now.

**John 2:10**. “Every man first puts forth the good wine and whenever
they [the guests] have become drunk the inferior [younger]. You have
kept the good wine until now.”

The chief steward reveals a custom that makes a fair amount of sense.
Serve the good wine first.

Drunk people cannot appreciate good wine. Their senses are dulled.

Drunk people cannot tell when inferior wine is served their palates are
corrupt.

You can hear the stuffy way in which this man communicates. He is
instructing the bridegroom with a very imperious tone of voice “Every
man…”

Of course, the poor man has no way of knowing that this wine has only
become so minutes ago. He makes a fool of himself before his knowing
servants.

The Greek adjective ***elasso***. is translated inferior. It really
means younger, which translates well as inferior when a wine frame of
reference is in view.

**John 2:11**. “This beginning of the signs Jesus did in Kana of Galilee
and manifested His glory and His disciples believed in Him.”

The word ***arche***. indicates that this is the very first miracle that
Christ performed. It is translated beginning.

It is for this reason that we know that Christ the child never did
miracles. It is also for this reason that we know that even as an adult
Christ never did miracles until this time.

This is what tells us that Mary had no frame of reference for the
spiritual gift of miracles: the same gift that Christ used to perform
this one.

John appropriately calls this miracle a ***se.meio.n a***sign. The
miracles and healings that Christ performed were all designed as signs
things which would point to His messiahship.

All of these things originate outside of Christ Himself due to the
doctrine of kenosis.

This sign manifested His glory. It is an attestation of His messiahship.
In none of these signs is Christ’s full glory revealed; they only point
to what is there.

Glory here is a reference to the character of God revealed in Christ. As
such, these signs do not point to Christ’s deity, but to the character
of God revealed in His humanity. That is the primary focus of the signs.

The character of God was produced through the humanity of Christ by His
appropriation of Divine grace in the ministry of the Spirit and the
study of the Word.

The signs also point to Christ as the Messiah, the one who is fit to
rule Israel and all the world in the millennial reign.

John also mentions that His disciples believed in Him at this point.

John 1:49 reveals that Nathanael Bartholomew was certainly a believer.
The mental attitudes of the other disciples are not revealed.

Philip, Andrew, Simon Peter, Nathanael Bartholomew, and perhaps one
unnamed disciple were the others present at this feast.

This was the clincher. Other signs had attended Christ in His life. The
miracles surrounding His birth were more than a few trivial things. The
triple miracle of His baptism was really fantastic, but it had happened
to and not by Jesus.

Now Jesus does a miracle, and because of it, His disciples believed.

There is more meaning than what meets the eye in this miracle. It is not
just a miracle; it is a symbol miracle.

The symbol miracle is one which reveals something about the kingdom.

Christ refers to wine in the kingdom context in Matt 9:17. There, the
new wine represents the plan of God for the millennium, while the
wineskins represent the subjects of the kingdom.

Here Christ turns common dishwater into superb wine; it was probably the
best vintage in history.

The common dishwater represents the ritual plan of God for Israel. It is
serviceable, and even potable as water, but not what you would always
want to drink if you did not have to (This makes the desire to return to
the ritual plan even more amazing).

The new wine represents the millennial rule of Christ, and the policy of
God for that rule.

This is finest of times under the greatest of rulers. Christ is the
essence of justice, love, grace, and order, and His reign will be
characterized by fantastic peace and prosperity.

This miracle therefore points to the greatness of the rule of Christ,
and the change from the plain to the immaculate.

The Divine Guidance of Jesus Christ
-----------------------------------

Jesus Christ functioned under a system of divine guidance that was both
similar to and unique from that used by church age believers.

Some believers in history have attempted to use the unique way in which
Christ was led, and therefore ended up with disaster. If you stay with
what is just for us as church age believers you will go the right way.

The unique part of divine guidance for Christ was that the Messianic
prophecies related to the first advent. Christ knew these prophecies
quite well as a part of His expertise on the Old Testament canon of
Scripture. When He determined from His store of wisdom that it was time
to fulfill a certain prophecy, then He did so with full confidence.

The wise decisions that Christ made in prophecy fulfillment were always
kept within the constraint of His perfect character. Christ knew that He
would fulfill prophecy; He did not manipulate events so that He would
and thus look good. He let the opportunities present themselves within
the integrity of the way that He conducted His life, and then He
fulfilled them.

We do not have ‘personal’ prophecies about our lives as Christ did, and
therefore we must avoid the Messiah syndrome with reference to divine
guidance. Events in the Bible are not types for our lives; Bible verses
do not provide direct guidance concerning where we should go or what we
should do; there is no kind of ‘twilight zone’ guidance from the pages
of Scripture.

One of the best illustrations of the Messianic guidance which Christ
received from Old Testament prophecy is His wilderness temptation. The
question is this: How did Christ know to go to the desert at that time?
Here is what we do know:

**Matthew 4:1**, “Then Jesus was led up into the wilderness by the
Spirit to be tempted by the devil”

The verb is in the passive voice, which indicates that our Lord did not
produce the action of the verb but instead received it. The constantive
aorist tense summarizes the past action into one moment of time. The
verb itself means to lead from a lower to a higher point. This point can
be figurative, as in the case of spiritual maturity, or literal, as in
this instance. Christ was going from the low point of the Jordan River
(just a few miles from the lowest land elevation on the planet) to the
rough wilderness above. This emphatically does not mean snatched away,
as some have tried to make the point that the Spirit picked our Lord up
and bodily moved Him to the desert. This is translated, ‘was led up’ The
Spirit did the leading and Christ did the following.

A second prepositional phrase puts forth the leadership of the Spirit,
who was the direct agent of the leading. It is HUPO TOU PNEUMATOS, and
translated "by the Spirit.

The last clause of the verse is a purpose clause. The verb is the aorist
passive of PEIRAZO, which means to put someone to the test. Depending on
the one doing the test, the purpose may be good or bad. This is
translated, ’to be tempted by the devil"

In the battle to come, it will be the ministry of God the Holy Spirit
versus the temptation of the devil.

This is the first evidence testing done under the conditions of the
church age. Christ is our prototype for the fulfillment of God’s plan
for the church age dispensation. An entirely new and never before tried
set of grace assets will be put through its paces over the next forty
plus days.

**Mark 1:12**, “And immediately the Spirit cast Him out into the desert”

The major difference here is in the verb that is used to describe the
action of the Spirit in getting Christ to the desert.

The verb EKBALLEI is in the present tense, which reveals an action as it
happens. It is the dramatic way to present the action typical of Mark’s
gospel. The verb literally means to cast out. The Spirit ‘cast out’
Christ into the wilderness. Again we do not yet know how this occurred,
only that it did.

**Luke 4:1, “And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit returned from the Jordan
and was being led by means of the Spirit in the desert.”** The main
change here is the revelation that Christ was led by the Spirit for the
duration of His stay in the desert, and that it was from a state of
being full from the Spirit that gave the leadership.

Four words work together to form the foundational statement of the
verse. They are translated “Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit.”

The nominative case of PLEIREIS forms the key part of the description it
denotes a state of complete fullness. It can denote thought or emotion,
negative or positive, but the idea here refers to the control of the
soul.

The verse does not say how, but it does make it clear that Christ is
under the control of PNEUMATOS HAGIOU, the Holy Spirit.

The first thing that Jesus does under the control of the Spirit is
return from the Jordan, where he had just been baptized. The word for
returned is HUPESTREPSEN, which is in the aorist tense. This describes a
past action occurring in one moment of time, and thus the translation
“He returned”.

The second thing is that “He was being led by means of the Spirit.”

The verb is the simple verb for the act of leading. It is in the passive
voice and so reveals that the subject receives the action of leadership.
The imperfect tense indicates that the action took place over a duration
of time in the past, and not just at one moment. It is translated, “He
was being led.”

The preposition EN plus the instrumental case of means shows that the
Spirit was the means of the leading.

en te. eremo. EN TEI EREMO portrays both location in the desert and the
amount of time spent there. It is translated, “in the desert” This tells
us that the Spirit not only led Christ to the desert, but also the
entire time that He was there.

Analysis of the three.

God the Holy Spirit exerted leadership in getting Christ to the desert
to be tested.

Christ is our prototype, and therefore the way in which the Spirit leads
Him is the way in which we are led.

The way in which the Spirit leads is fully revealed in the New Testament
canon.

Just because all the mechanics are not revealed in these passages about
the wilderness temptation does not mean that they are not there. In
fact, it is implicit that they are from the mention of the Spirit’s
leadership.

The Spirit guides through the recall of Bible Truth.

The Spirit guided Christ through the recall of both the principles of
Divine character and Messianic prophecy.

In this case, the Spirit recalled Isaiah 40:35, “A voice is calling,
‘Clear the way for the Lord in the wilderness; Make smooth in the desert
a highway for our God. Let every valley be lifted up, and every mountain
and hill be made low; and let the rough ground become a plain, and the
rugged terrain broad valley. Then the glory of the Lord will be
revealed, and all flesh will see it together; for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken.’”

Christ understood this passage as we do it reveals the ministry of John
the Baptist. Malachi 3:1 corroborates this fact.

And the ministry of John the Baptist was to prepare the way for the
Messiah in the desert. From this it would seem obvious the direction
that Christ would take upon the completion of His baptism straight to
the desert.

And so Christ obeyed the leadership of the Spirit and entered the desert
not by hocus pocus but by the recall of Messianic prophecy and
application.

#### Divine Guidance and the Essence of God

In order to remain in the direct will of God you must begin with
humility based on the essence of God proper.

In order to remain in the direct will of God you must have spiritual
self esteem based on the capabilities of God.

In order to remain in the direct will of God you must make decisions
from the nike the victorious ideology of the Christian way of life. 1
John 5:4: “And this is the victorious ideology that has overcome the
cosmic system our doctrine.”

The victorious ideology includes the right mental attitude of Divine
Character.

The overall principle of righteousness and justice.

The motivation of personal love for God and virtue love for mankind.

The grace approach to problem solving and flexible proficiency.

The forethought of organization.

The principle of willpower in self control.

The extension of willpower over time in the temperament of faithfulness
and dependability.

The communication with integrity.

The victorious ideology includes an understanding of the true goal.

The victorious ideology includes a thorough understanding the field of
endeavor.

The victorious ideology includes an understanding of the mechanics which
lead to the attainment of the true goal.

Implementation of the victorious ideology in any field of endeavor or
matter of guidance will result in your ending up where God wants you in
His direct will.

In other words, make the decision from the best available information.

Recognize the function of the Divine Decree in the presentation of
opportunity, but sift opportunity through the filter of Divine
Character.

Do not seek to make things happen because of your unhappiness with your
life circumstances.

If things are bad and the opportunity arises to move on, then do so. If
things are bad and Divine character demands that you move on, then by
all means do so.

Do not let circumstances dictate your decisions. Difficult circumstances
are a test of your willpower and faithfulness, but not necessarily
messages from God. Christ ran into endless difficulty in the execution
of His ministry, but He did not use them as an excuse to stop teaching
the Word. This is one of the primary reasons that I am still in the
ministry.

On the other hand, if circumstances are overwhelming they may prompt you
to reconsider your present position through the lens of divine
character. You may find violations which force you in another direction.
The divine discipline of Paul illustrates this.

Sometimes even when you have all of your ducks in a row with a decision
God still overrules. You can bet that He has a greater purpose in mind
for you if He does. 1 Thess 2:18 is the perfect illustration.

The First Cleansing of the Temple
---------------------------------

A distinction must be made between the two times that Christ cleansed
the temple. Christ cleansed the temple at the beginning and end of His
ministry. The second occurrence came during the last week of His life,
and is recorded in Matt 21:1213; Mark 11:1518; Luke 19:4548; John 2:1325

Before Christ went to Jerusalem and the Temple, and after he changed the
water into wine, He stayed a few days in Capernaum (John 2:12).

His mother and His brothers (according to the flesh), and His disciples
were all there with Him.

Capernaum was the headquarters of Christ’s Galilean ministry, and that
ministry comprised the majority of His overall effort.

Matthew 9:1 calls Capernaum Christ’s ‘own city’.

Christ chose Capernaum because it was the most important city in the
region. The Romans had a sizeable military contingent there, and there
were many government officials about. It was an important trade center,
and much commerce came there because of the fishing industry.

Here, Christ could teach the kingdom to Jews and Gentiles alike. He
could have an impact that would be talked about throughout the region.

This points out that Christ had a plan for His ministry; that He was
organized and wise in the spreading of the word; He imitates His father
in this area of foresight and planning.

**John 2:13**, “And the passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up
into Jerusalem”

Now, it does not indicate in this verse that His disciples were with
Him, but verse 17 says that His action here prompted their recall of an
Old Testament passage. That verse does not absolutely require the
disciples’ presence. One of three things: Christ went up alone, and His
disciples joined Him at the temple; Christ went up alone, and His
disciples heard about the cleansing after the fact; Christ went up with
His disciples, but John failed to mention it here. The second option is
the most probable.

We do not know if Christ had been to Jerusalem in the 15 or so years
since His first passover. It is unlikely that He did, because He is not
remembered or identified in any real way by the officials in the temple.
When He does His deed, they ask Him for a sign. This reveals their
ignorance.

The passover had to be a rather poignant time for Christ.

On His mind would rest the burden of the sins of the world, for He knew
that He would have to pay for them in the not too distant future.

As He enters the temple, that grand representative structure of all that
He is and will do, His mind is full of doctrine.

Through this structure, and the doings of the priests, the people are to
come to know the Father through Him.

**John 2:14**, “And He found in the temple the ones who were selling
oxen and sheep and doves, and the ones who were seated, the money
changers.”

The temple had become the very center of an extremely corrupt system. It
was the ultimate monopoly, and the evil priests manipulated that
monopoly into a moneymaking machine.

The Law prescribed that only sacrifices without spot or blemish were
worthy for sacrifice in the temple.

The chief priests manipulated this by making sure that no one had a
worthy animal. They sent their inspectors to school for months so that
they could identify the defects of any given animal. Actually this just
became an excuse for disqualifying the animals brought by the heads of
households. They also came to charge the people for the inspection of
their animals. This evil led many to just give up and buy the animals
that the temple provided, without even trying to bring their own. This
was wrong, wrong, wrong. The whole point of the sacrifice was that it
would come from the family; that the man would know the animal
personally; that he would see the cost of sin, and greatness of God’s
sacrifice in sending His own Son. The reason for all this rigmarole was
so that the people would have to buy an animal from the temple. Of
course the prices on these animals was greatly inflated, and the chiefs
priests made a great profit from them.

Furthermore, the chief priests and officials made it so that the animals
could only be bought with the official temple currency, and the exchange
rates were quite exorbitant. Thus, the moneychangers.

With the clinking of coins and the mutter of exchange and the baaahing
of sheep and the cooing of pigeons and the mooing of cattle you could
hardly hear yourself think in the house of worship. There was record of
more than three thousand head of sheep in the temple at one time. What
cacophony! What corruption!

So, Christ walks into His Father’s house, the house designed for
learning about His sacrifice, and He finds the worst kind of corruption.
What follows is not an act of anger, but justice.

**John 2:15**, “And He made a scourge from ropes and He cast all of them
out from the temple and the sheep and the oxen, and He poured out the
coins of the moneychangers and He overturned the tables.”

Physical wreckage is much preferred over spiritual corruption.

There were a bunch of moneychangers, and only one Christ, but they did
not attempt to stop Him.

Was Christ an imposing figure, or were they so shocked by this action
that they did not respond?

The scourge of ropes could have been a fearful weapon, when wielded by
one with skill.

The tables used by money changers were really just small stools, behind
which the clerk sat on the ground. They were laden with coins, but would
not have taken any great strength to overturn. It is more likely that
Christ kicked them over than turned them over by hand.

Christ had a human body unpolluted by the influence of the sin nature.
He could have been an imposing figure indeed.

Christ had been a carpenter by trade. It is likely that He had great
strength in His hands and arms, because the profession was even more
rigorous then than it is now.

John rather humorously adds the driving out of the sheep and oxen; he
makes a funny because you already expected them to be driven out. Christ
drives out the wimpy bankers and moneychangers and inspectors, and even
the oxen and sheep.

By pouring out the coins and overturning the tables, Christ made it
impossible for them to determine whose money was whose. He effectively
destroyed their profits.

**John 2:16**, “And to those who were selling doves, He said, ‘Remove
these things from here [in any direction], do not make the house of My
Father a house of merchandise.’”

This is the final part of the cleansing phase.

The verb ***airo*** [***arate***] is in the aorist imperative. The
aorist tells us that Christ intended for the command to be carried out
immediately.

The first words of Christ in this incident contain a command. He has
legitimate authority in this place.

Christ calls the temple ‘the house of His Father’. This is the
legitimizing factor.

Christ is the rightful heir to the throne of Israel.

Christ is the rightful chief priest of Israel.

Christ is the Son of God.

Therefore, what He does here is an expression of natural law.

The Greek word EXOUSIA summarizes natural law in the concept of
legitimate authority. It includes in its definition both rights and
legitimate authority. The question arises: did Christ have the right to
exert authority in the temple? The answer is a very emphatic yes!

The word EMPORIOU is the source of our English emporium. It really does
describe well a Wal-Mart kind of store. There was so much stuff in the
temple it more resembled an emporium than a place of worship.

This principle applies directly to the church.

The church is to never become a business or a house of merchandise for
the purpose of profit.

The policy for giving and distribution of the Word of God must always
remain grace. The ancient temple was the center for the distribution of
truth. The chief priests had put a price on the Word, and such a thing
was evil. The same thing is true today.

The Word of God should never come with a price tag. Instead, through the
grace giving of believers, a budget is set for the dissemination of the
Word. The contributions received through grace giving are to be
considered the direct will of God for the budget of that local assembly.

Attempts to augment the church budget through merchandising step outside
of God’s direct will, and illegitimatize the ministry of the church that
does so.

If the Jews there at the temple were flabbergasted by Christ’s actions,
then they were certainly just as flabbergasted at his words.

**John 2:17**, “His disciples remembered that it was utterly written,
‘Zeal for Thy house will devour Me.’”

This quotation comes from Psalm 69:9. John cites it in order to remind
his readers that Christ is the Messiah about whom the Old Testament
prophesied.

Christ’s supernatural fulfillment of more than three hundred Old
Testament prophecies is one of the most stunning testimonies to the
veracity of the Word of God.

The periphrastic construction of the verb EIMI with the participle
GEGRAMMENON really emphasizes the writing of the Word. ‘It stands
written’ is not a bad translation; what should be stressed in the
translation is the unchangeable nature of the Word, once written.

Psalm 69 itself is one which describes undeserved suffering.

In the first several verses David relates a desperate situation: he is
up to his neck in water… he is sinking in a bottomless pit of quicksand,
vv.23.

David takes some of the blame on himself and his sin against God, v.6.

However, since he confessed his sins whatever deserved suffering he had
was immediately converted to undeserved.

Verse 10 makes it clear that David’s zeal for the plan of God is the
single most contributing factor for his undeserved suffering.

qin’ath is the Hebrew word for zeal, and it denotes emotional action.
There are two kinds: crusader arrogance emotional revolt, and
emotionally charged legitimate action. The zeal here is legitimate. It
is governed completely by thought.

The phrase ‘for my father’s house’ is a reference to the temple. The
temple stood for the plan of God for Israel. It was a standing metaphor
for Bible Truth and spiritual growth, and ultimately of relationship
with God.

Here is undeserved suffering for blessing. Here is undeserved suffering
for being a believer in Jesus Christ and fulfilling God’s plan for your
life.

The final part of the Psalm makes it very clear that the zeal is not the
direct source of the suffering, but the people who do not like the zeal
for God’s plan, “And the insults of those who insult thee have fallen on
me.”

Christ acted with zeal, but it was good zeal. He is not acting in anger,
but in love for God. Christ is not consumed by zeal itself, but the zeal
causes others to pursue Him and hate him.

This event signals the beginning of organized resistance to Jesus
Christ, and foreshadows His death and resurrection.

**John 2:18**, “The Jews therefore answered and said to Him, ‘What sign
do You show to us, seeing that You do these things?’”

The Jews were no doubt flabbergasted by Christ’s assumption of authority
in the temple, and his reference to it as ‘His Father’s house’.

They desired of Him a sign, some outward miracle that would prove His
position of authority.

This is fascinating, because it is not more than two weeks since the
temptation of Jesus Christ, when the devil took Christ to the top of
this same temple and tempted Him to jump down as a sign to these same
men. Christ rejected the method proposed by Satan, but more than that,
He knew that all the greatest signs in the world mean nothing to people
who stand negative to the Truth.

Such were these men. They demanded a sign, because they assumed they
would not receive one. They assumed that Christ’s authority was not
legitimate. This is the same leadership that went to John the Baptist
just a few weeks before. They got a pretty good explanation from John at
that time about the person of Christ, the Messiah.

Negative volition rejects God, regardless of how easy it is to believe.

Positive volition accepts God, regardless of the obstacles to belief.

**John 2:19,** “Jesus answered and said to them, ‘Destroy this temple,
and in three days I will raise it up.’”

This is Jesus’ supply of a sign. Of course, the Jews would have to wait
three years for this sign. It is the resurrection sign, the greatest
sign of all time.

Note that Christ concentrates on the greatest sign even though He will
do many other things, such as miracles and healings.

Christ had ample reason to know of His resurrection. The correct
interpretation of the story of Jonah and the big fish would render the
information of His death and resurrection. Christ did not pull this idea
out of thin air, He pulled it out of the Old Testament through the
recall ministry of God the Holy Spirit.

**Matthew 12:38-40** gives the full explanation of this, “Then some of
the scribes and Pharisees answered Him, saying, ‘Teacher, we want to see
a sign from You.’ But He answered and said to them, ‘An evil and
adulterous generation craves for a sign; and yet no sign shall be given
to it but the sign of Jonah the prophet; for just as Jonah was three
days and three nights in the belly of the Sea Monster, so shall the Son
of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.’”

This is a simple simile, and nothing else.

Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the Sea Monster;

Christ would descend to Sheol, under the abyss after His death and
before His resurrection.

This prediction of a sign so scared the Jews that they insisted a guard
be put on His tomb after His death. Matthew 27:62-66.

Notice that Christ implicates the Jews in His death. Already He is
seeing the sign of their murderous negative volition.

But the Pharisees didn’t get Christ’s statement, not yet, except for
one.

**John 2:20**, “The Jews therefore said, ‘It took forty-six years to
build this temple, and will You raise it up in three days?’”

They did not get the point.

The temple had been building for forty six years to date. It would
hardly be finished for another forty.

It is singular that the Pharisees who were there were stricken by the
ludicrous nature of Christ’s claim as they perceived it. Yet had they
perceived it as Christ proclaimed it, they would have thought it much
more so.

According to their perception, they would have to tear down the temple
around them.

This was the temple of bribery. Herod, the half-breed Jew gave it to the
Jews so that they would love him as ruler.

The Jews hated Herod, but took the bribe anyway.

The temple itself was a perfect symbol of Jewish hypocrisy, and yet they
were quite blind to that hypocrisy.

They were not about to tear down Herod’s temple, their pride was
inextricably wound together with this building.

Christ gives the Jews an interesting test by remaining vague about to
which temple He refers.

Christ has legitimate authority to order this temple of Herod’s
destroyed, but He does not do that.

**John 2:21**, “But He was speaking of the temple of His body.”

Christ was deliberately vague, but He was definitely communicating about
His body as this verse reveals.

Since Christ always communicated clearly, the Jews misunderstood Him
from their own blind arrogance.

**John 2:22**, “When therefore He was raised from the dead, his
disciples remembered that He said this; and they believed the Scripture,
and the word which Jesus had spoken.”

An interesting point, but there were others who heard this and believed
it.

Nicodemus certainly heard these words, and they were likely to have
prompted his curiosity to come to Christ.

Nicodemus provided for Christ’s burial along with Joseph of Arimathea.

Joseph of Arimathea was also among the Jewish rulers at this event, and
heard this statement as well.

The passive voice of ege.rthe. reveals that Christ did not raise
Himself, but that He would be raised, specifically by the power of God
the Holy Spirit. Rom 1:4.

When Christ says that He will raise the temple Himself in verse 19, He
must be speaking from the Godhead. Christ did not raise Himself. He
could say this in a Trinitarian sense. The Positive Response at the
Passover

**John 2:23**, “Now when He was in Jerusalem at the Passover, during the
feast, many believed in His name, beholding His signs which He was
doing.”

Remember, Christ came down to Jerusalem from Cana in order to
participate in this Passover.

In this verse John reveals a positive response to Christ’s ministry.
Remember, John is likely an eyewitness to these events.

The positive response was belief. This belief is total trust in a person
or institution for what they offer.

The belief was directed toward the name of Christ. Parents designed the
names of their children so that they would reveal the essence of the
child. Christ’s name was Jesus, which meant salvation in the Hebrew. The
essence of Christ was truly salvation. And He would die as a substitute
for the sins of mankind, and satisfy the justice of God regarding the
issue of human sin.

The positive response has a cause: they beheld the signs which He was
doing.

Christ was performing miracles. Christ was healing the sick and lame.

**John 2:24**, “But Jesus Himself was not trusting Himself to them,
because He knew all men.”

This is truly a great verse, revealing God’s wisdom incarnate in Jesus
Christ.

Although man must believe in Christ, Christ does not have to believe in
man.

God understands perfectly the nature of human degeneracy and the total
depravity of man.

God never has to trust man, and in fact is wise not to trust him.

This applies to believers. We are never required to entrust ourselves to
man unless it is legitimate authority.

We must be wise in choosing whom we will trust.

Do not take ‘knowing all men’ as the equivalent of omnipresence or
omniscience. During the incarnation Christ voluntarily restricted the
independent use of His Divine capabilities and the independent
expression of Divine character. Instead, He knew all man because He knew
the principles related to the nature of man. If you know these
principles, then you truly know man.

**John 2:25**, “And because He did not have need for anyone to testify
concerning man; for He Himself knew what was in man.”

This reveals the background for verse 24.

The word for need is ***chreian***. It comes from the ‘grace’ word
group.

***charis*** is the approach to problem solving. This is grace.

***chrestos*** is the ability to solve problems within the parameters of
the grace approach. This is proficiency.

***chreian*** is the absolute necessity of doing things according to
approach of grace and the ability of proficiency.

But this verse says that Christ did not have a need for anyone to
testify concerning the untrustable nature of man that He knew Himself
what was in man.

First how did Christ know this Himself? The only answer is that He had
combined experience with the Word of God. He did not know the nature of
sinful man from His divine nature.

Christ derived the principles of human nature from Scripture, and
confirmed them through the observation of man in His life.

Second, the phrase ‘what was in man’ refers directly to the principles
of human nature. The human soul, the human body, the old sin nature, the
imputation of Adam’s Original Sin, all of these things are ‘what are in
man.’

Since this verse concentrates on the negative in man, it is the
combination of the sin nature and original sin that Christ used to
conclude that He should not trust Himself to man.

Nicodemus and Christ
--------------------

Nicodemus is a Greek name that means ‘Victor of the People’. Indeed he
would be.

He is found only in John’s Gospel, in John 3:1-10; 7:37-52; and
19:38-42.

John 3:1 names him as a man of the Pharisees and a ruler of the Jews.
The latter places him as a member of the Sanhedrin. A glimpse at this
ruling body will reveal much about the man.

The word “Sanhedrin” comes from the Greek SUNEDRION, ‘a sitting place
together’. It describes many people sitting together in the same place.

In the second and third centuries, the Persians, then the Greeks began
to grant the Jews some privileges of self rule. The ruling counsel of
the Sanhedrin finds its roots there, but the actual organization did not
come into being until the time of the Maccabees, about 190 B.C.

They patterned themselves after the 70 elders of Moses’ appointment in
Numbers 11:16, and claimed to exist continually since that time (about
1400 B.C.).

The Sanhedrin consisted of 70 members, presided over by the High Priest
of the Jews. After the High Priest, the leadership fell to the Chief
Priests, and then to the rank and file of the elders.

The powers and religious alignment of the Sanhedrin rose and fell
throughout the time from its inception to Christ’s era. Sometimes it was
dominated by Hellenists, sometimes by nationalists. Sometimes it had a
great amount of influence over the lives of the Jews, sometimes hardly
any. Sometimes it ruled much land, others only a small sliver.

At this time, 27 A.D. the Sanhedrin was dominated by a conciliatory
branch of Jews known as the Sadducees, although there was a strong
branch of Pharisees as well. They had a lot of power over both spiritual
and secular matter, although only in Judea. However, all of Israel felt
the influence of their power, and no place was truly free from their
tyranny.

The Sanhedrin was a court much akin to the supreme court of the United
States. When a lower court could not come to a decision, then the higher
court would have to intervene. During Christ’s time, the Sanhedrin was
trusted with most of the civil as well as religious cases. They had a
tremendous influence on internal affairs, and apparently no small
influence even in cases of capital crimes.

The Sanhedrin had its own police force, and no doubt had a constant
temptation to abuse the powers of arrest. Otherwise, they would follow
simple rules of jurisprudence.

Nicodemus was a rank and file member of the Sanhedrin minority party. He
was just an elder.

He was one of the legalistic Pharisees. He would have an influence on
policy, even though in the minority. The greater Sanhedrin could not
rule effectively without the input and cooperation of men like
Nicodemus.

The Sadducees were the aristocratic and Romantic branch of the Jewish
Leadership. They were very antisupernatural in their world view, even
denying the afterlife. They remained very materialistic, and were
sycophantic toward the Roman rulership in order to retain their wealth.

The Pharisees were scholars, although extremely legalistic in their
outlook, fanatics for making laws that did not exist. The Pharisees
fashioned themselves as the champions of the people and yet were very
oppressive in their rule.

Both considered themselves the best. Both were wrong. Nicodemus,
however, was an honest man with positive volition.

READ John 3:19

Nicodemus was apparently a famous man, a member of the ruling council of
the Pharisees, the Sanhedrin. In other words, he was a super Pharisee.

Nicodemus came to Jesus by night. The original language shows a little
surprise at this appearance. Perhaps because the Pharisees were already
more than a little leery of Christ. The night time appearance reveals
his desire to keep the visit a secret Nicodemus did not want the other
Pharisees to know about this. It also shows his positive volition to
Jesus Christ.

Nicodemus’ first words reveal his positive volition further. He has put
two and two together in his own mind about Christ, and makes a statement
to this effect. ‘Rabbi, we know that you have come as a teacher from
God; for no one is able to do these signs which you do, unless God is
with him.’ This statement does not go all the way; but it is true.

Jesus’ reply is a compliment. It assumes the best of Nicodemus that he
is a believer. What he is saying is this: that Nicodemus’ statement
reveals that he has seen the kingdom of God. Born from above is a
reference to salvation. The notion of born again is not in the adverb
ANOTHEN. ANOTHEN is never used in classical Greek to denote the idea of
‘again’. In fact, the use of this adverb in that way is drawn from this
passage. Christ did not intend to use it that way, and neither did
Nicodemus mistake it in that way.

Nicodemus mistook ANOTHEN for a word which sounds almost like it
ANTHROPON. Nicodemus says ANTHROPOS in his next sentence.

Nicodemus’ question in reply to his misunderstanding of Jesus’ statement
is relevant “How can a man (anthropos) being old be born?” Someone who
is already a man cannot be born. You are born and then you become a man.
He makes his point really clear by his example: ’He cannot enter a
second time into his mother’s womb and be born, can he?" Jesus was
speaking on a spiritual level and Nicodemus on an earthly one.

Jesus reply in verse 5 is a clarification for Nicodemus. “Unless anyone
is born of water and the Spirit, he is not able to enter into the
kingdom of God.”

Notice that this is a parallel of His previous statement except that he
substitutes EX HUDATOS KAI PNEUMATOS for ANOTHEN, and ‘enter into the
kingdom of God’ instead of ‘see the kingdom of God’.

Our Lord is responding to the mistake of Nicodemus, and also changing
his assessment. Instead of assuming that Nicodemus is a believer, Christ
now assumes that he has yet to enter the kingdom.

‘Born of water and the Spirit’ is especially pertinent because it
reveals two births.

Born of water is not a reference to baptism. Instead it is a reference
to human birth. Before every birth, the woman’s water breaks (actually
it is the fluid from the amniotic sac). Born of water is reference to
this. It appears that every person is born of water, and this is a good
way to make it clear that you are talking about human birth.

Born of the spirit is of course a reference to salvation, where God the
Holy Spirit makes the new believer a new creature in Christ through His
baptizing ministry.

Our Lord’s implication is this: that you must be both a man and believe
in order to enter the kingdom of God. In a roundabout way he also tells
Nicodemus that he is right about the first birth, but wrong about the
second.

In verse 6, Jesus gives even further clarification on the matter. “That
which is born from the flesh is flesh, and that which is born from the
Spirit is Spirit.”

This simply divides birth into two categories: fleshly birth and
spiritual birth.

It takes the point of view of origin in the matter of birth. The kind of
birth which you have is a matter of the origin of that birth.

In verse 7 Christ deals with Nicodemus’ mistake. "Do not take surprise
that I said to you, ‘It is necessary for you to be born from above.’ In
the next verse, our Lord draws an analogy to explain this statement.
These two verses, 7 and 8, are Christ’s final explanation of His first
statement. Essentially He says, ‘do not misunderstand.’ Nicodemus was
not amazed, he misunderstood.

The analogy that Christ uses is this: “The wind blows where it wills and
you hear the sound of it, but you do not know where it comes or where it
is going; so is everyone who is born from the Spirit.”

Christ is emphasizing that this is an invisible birth.

The birth from above is one which we know exists. We can see the results
of it in believers (the sound).

Unlike the birth from flesh, we cannot perceive with our senses the
origin or destination of the birth from above.

In other words, Christ is just showing a further distinction between the
two kinds of birth, so that Nicodemus will clearly know in his own mind
that there is a spiritual birth.

In Nicodemus’ final words he reiterates his positive volition. He says,
“How can these things come to pass?”

Nicodemus uses the demonstrative adverb TAUTA to form the subject of his
reply. It is a word that must be defined by a previous reference. It is
translated, ‘these things’, and it goes back to these things:

The birth from above that gives insight into the kingdom of God.

The birth from above that enables one to enter the kingdom of God.

The birth from above that comes from the ministry of God the Holy
Spirit.

The ministry of the Spirit that is invisible yet very real, and with a
will of its own.

By using the verb GINOMAI instead of the verb ESTIN, he shows his desire
for the second birth. Nicodemus wants to know how to get the second
birth for himself. GINOMAI is the verb of becoming, not of being.
GINOMAI always indicates a change, an entrance into a new status.

Furthermore, Nicodemus uses DUNATAI, the verb of ability. By using
DUNATAI, Nicodemus reveals his desire to know mechanics; to know what is
to be done to gain entrance into God’s kingdom.

Nicodemus asks this question in such a way as to reveal a personal
desire for this information he wants to become a believer.

Later passages reveal that at some point Nicodemus did accept Christ.
His words in chapter 7 and his deeds in chapter 19 reveal it.

Verse 10, “Jesus answered and said to him,”You are the teacher of Israel
and do not know these things?"

This verse is more of an exclamation than anything. Nicodemus as a
member of the Sanhedrin should be an expert on salvation. He is a leader
of his nation, and one who holds grave judicial responsibilities.

This also serves as a reminder of the kind of leadership that Israel had
at the time. It was weak spiritually, and so the rank and file in the
country would be exceedingly weak. This is why Christ would not trust
the new believers. They had very little inherent restraint on the sin
nature.

Verse 11, “Truly, truly I say to you that we speak that which we have
known, and we testify what we have seen, and you do not receive our
testimony.”

The formula amen stands as a pre-certification for what is to follow.
Christ uses it to convince His hearers of the verity of His statement
before they even listen to His words.

The two second verbs, oidamen and heorakamen are both in the perfect
tense. In this case, they show something that is a life changing event
the intervention of God. Christ uses the first person plural because He
speaks for his followers and disciples as well. So, His disciples speak
because God has intervened, and they know it. They testify because God
has intervened and they have seen it. The knowing has to do with the
doctrines, especially kingdom doctrines that Christ teaches. The seeing
has to do with the miracles and healings that are done by Christ.

All of this earnest testimony and speech, and yet the Sanhedrin does not
receive it. Christ employs the second person singular [you all], so He
speaks to more than just Nicodemus.

Christ chides Nicodemus and his Pharisee and Sanhedrin mates so that
Nicodemus might understand that this is not his first opportunity to
receive the gospel. Perhaps Nicodemus was a part of the Sanhedrin task
force sent to John the Baptist to find out whether Christ was fit to be
their Messiah.

But Christ is getting at something more…

Verse 12, “If I spoke to you [all] earthly things and you [all] do not
believe, how will you believe if I were to speak heavenly things?”

Christ uses a really fascinating conditional sentence. He begins in
reality, by citing in the protasis what has already occurred. Then He
postulates from the protasis what should logically occur as a result.

‘If I spoke to you earthly things…’ This has really happened. The aorist
indicative of lego reveals this as an actual past event. Christ has
spoken to Nicodemus and others about earthly things.

Their response was unbelief, one and all. Nicodemus, the Pharisees, the
Sadducees, the Sanhedrin, they have all rejected Christ on the earthly
level.

Now Christ postulates with the aorist subjunctive. This applies a likely
outcome to a circumstance. The circumstance is Christ telling the Jewish
leadership about heavenly things. The likely outcome is unbelief. The
kind of reasoning here is simple: if the Jewish leadership is unable to
believe an easy thing, then how will they ever believe the more
difficult? It is like saying, ‘Because you could not lift 100 lbs., it
is fair to assume that you cannot lift 200 lbs.’

Christ uses the second person plural to impersonalize this principle. He
does not want Nicodemus to believe that He applies it to him.

This discourse on the negative volition of the Jewish leadership
precedes the giving of the gospel, and for a reason. Jesus helps to
identify for Nicodemus a sense of destiny about his unique position in
the Sanhedrin as a believer. Remember, this reproof of Christ’s is
directed at a body of men, not Nicodemus directly.

You, too, can have this kind of unique destiny by being a believer in a
time when belief is not so popular. For Nicodemus, there was some of the
greatest peer pressure against belief in God of all time, and yet He
wanted to believe. This reproof and brief discourse is all about helping
Nicodemus to identify himself, and separate himself from his peers.

Verse 13, “And no one has ascended into heaven, except the one who first
descended from heaven, the Son of Man.”

The **Son of Man** is a prophetic term, a reference to Christ’s
relationship with Adam.

It occurs 107 times in the Old Testament, but only fourteen times
outside of Ezekiel. In those cases outside of Ezekiel, it is almost
universally an idiom for ‘human being’. But in one instance in Daniel,
it most certainly refers to Adam himself. The one time that it is used
in the singular in Daniel is 7:13, and this is the reference for the
popular term in New Testament times.

Daniel 7:1314, “I kept looking in the night visions, and behold, with
the clouds of heaven one like a Son of Adam was coming. And He came up
to the Ancient of Days and was presented before Him. And to Him was
given dominion, glory and a kingdom, that all the peoples, nations, and
men of every language might serve Him. His dominion is an everlasting
dominion which will not pass away; and His kingdom is one which will not
be destroyed.”

The ’Ancient of Days is an Aramaic title that refers to God the Father
as judge of Jesus Christ. Daniel 7:722 is the only instance of this
title for God the Father. It concentrates on his eternal nature, and His
authority over the other two members of the Godhead.

God would judge the sins of mankind in the Son of Adam on the cross.

God gave two evaluations of His Son during the incarnation ‘This is my
Son, whom I love, in whom I am well pleased.’ Once at His baptism, and
once at the transfiguration.

The picture presented in Daniel’s vision is the transfer of authority
from God the Father to Jesus Christ the Son. This transfer of authority
occurred in heaven most likely immediately before the incarnation. This
is something of a Christmas story from Daniel. It is a revelation of the
moments before the incarnation of Christ, the sad/glad going away
ceremony for the Son. From that moment forward God the Son would never
be the same. He would become the God man, and though His deity did not
change, His status did. This is the moment when Christ voluntarily
restricted the independent use of His divine attributes, and the
independent expression of His divine character. This moment was somewhat
akin to taking a military oath.

The earthly transfer of authority took place at Christ’s baptism.

The term ‘the Son of Man’ describes here Christ’s relationship to the
first man, Adam.

READ Romans 5:12-21.

Naturally, this verse would be a popular one with an oppressed nation
such as Israel.

In Ezekiel the prophet himself is addressed as the son of Adam, an
identification of him as one belonging to the human race.

By the time that Christ came on the scene, the Son of Man was a popular
term, and needed no explanation whatsoever. Never once in the New
Testament does the use of the term require an explanation to the readers
or listeners. It is simply used. Christ employed the direct Greek
translation of the term, which used the noun anthropos as a translation
for the Hebrew Adam.

Now the verse serves to communicate that Christ is indeed the Son of
Man. This is one for Nicodemus to remember a few years from this time,
when Christ does ascend.

This is not the first time that Christ uses His own future as evidence
for His deity. Remember the cleansing, when he used His own resurrection
as future evidence. Well, here we go again.

So, Christ will ascend, and it will mean this: that He descended from
heaven at some time before. At this moment when Christ speaks to
Nicodemus, He has already descended. Nicodemus alluded to it, but
believed that Christ was just a man sent from God. Christ identifies
Himself as the Son of Adam, who is the Son of God, and offers His future
ascension as evidence for His present status.

Verse 14, “And just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness,
even so must the Son of man be lifted up.”

Verse 15 will deal with the purpose for this statement, but let’s see
what this says first.

A comparison is drawn between a past event for Israel, and the necessity
of a future event in the life of Christ.

Again this is the use of a future event for evidence of present status.

This event that Christ refers to is in Numbers 21: 9. The setting is
that of yet another rebellion by the children of Israel against Moses
and against God. Specifically, “Why have you brought us up out of Egypt
to die in the wilderness? For there is no food and no water, and we
loathe this miserable food.”

The discipline for this complaining attitude was a plague of fiery
serpents, which bit the Jews, many of whom died. The fiery term is most
likely due to a specific effect of the venom on the nervous system.

Well, with this kind of discipline, many of the Jews repented, and went
before Moses to seek forgiveness, asking him to intercede on their
behalf.

Moses went before God for his people, and so God forgave them. As a
sign, God required Moses to make a fiery serpent of bronze and lift it
up before the people so that if they looked at it they would live.

When people received a bite by a serpent they would look at the bronze
serpent and be cured of the effects of the venom.

Moses’ serpent was made of bronze to represent the judgment of God
concerning this sin.

By looking at the serpent, an expression of belief was made. The kind of
seeing here is the Hebrew word RA’AH, the equivalent of the Greek
THEOREO, ‘to behold’. The idea is looking with a desire to know. The
pure motive is taken into account in the looking, and not everyone who
glanced the way of the serpent would be healed of their sin and the
discipline that accompanied it.

Now Christ would be lifted up on the cross.

Verse 15, “that whoever believes in Him might have eternal life.”

This verse sets the standard for salvation unto eternal life.

Note the third class conditional sentence: salvation is a direct result
of the expression of human will.

The work is done; the son of man has been lifted up; we need only trust
in that work. Not in what we do, or thing, or any kind of merit inherent
in ourselves. Just Him, and more specifically the work done on the
cross.

This is a purpose clause; the Son of man was lifted up on the cross so
that we might believe, and no other reason. ***hina***.

Notice that the adjective pas describes the universal condition for
salvation, ‘everyone who believes.’ There is no exception, no amount or
severity placed on sin, so that some of the worst who believe are
excluded. Every one who believes, without exception, without reference
to what has gone in the past.

Next, is the Divine motive. Why has God chosen to forgive mankind, even
the most sinful of men?

Verse 16, “For God so loved the world, so that He gave his only born
Son, in order that everyone who believes in Him might not perish but
might have eternal life.”

The verse has three parts: the motivation of God, the resultant action,
and the purpose of the action. Here begins a commentary by the writer of
this gospel, and not the words of Christ Himself.

The ‘might’ here is dependent absolutely on human volition. The might is
not,’ believe, and you might not perish’, but you will not perish if you
do believe. It is not, ‘Believe and you might have eternal life’, but
believe and you definitely will have it. The might is that the verse
looks at the possibility from the viewpoint of human free will, not what
God might do after the free will is expressed. This is a Greek third
class condition, and it shows that if the condition is fulfilled, then
always, always, the results will come to pass. Here, the condition is
belief in Christ, and here, everyone who believes does not perish, but
comes to have eternal life.

The conjunction ***houto.s*** indicates a stronger degree of God’s love.
He so loved…

The verb ***e.gape.sen*** is from ***agapao***. Virtue love is in view
here. The verb is in the aorist tense, and so reveals one moment of time
in eternity past. That moment when God conceived His perfect idea on how
to provide for the redemption of mankind.

So first, the love of God.

Love is a word that describes purity of motive.

Motivation is a thought or system of thought that leads one to act. In
order to move, you must first think.

Given the conditions of fallen mankind and the perfection of God, what
was the thought or system of thought that moved God to act in the
provision of salvation?

The Bible reveals that it was the purest motive of all, love. The very
verse we study confirms this.

The motive was not anything that we might consider from human viewpoint:
it was not attraction to the human race, for they were in total
depravity; not personality or physical attractiveness or success or
clothing or anything else. God looks at the heart, and before Christ,
the heart is wicked, with nothing that might attract the love of God.

The motive was a desire for the human race to have the same thing that
the three members of the Godhead had, a virtue love relationship.

From eternity past, God has perfect personal love among the members of
the Godhead.

The Father has perfect love for the Son and the Spirit.

The Son has perfect love for the Father and the Spirit.

The Spirit has perfect love for the Father and Son.

This love is based on the virtue of both the subject and the object of
love. It is perfect love expressed toward perfection, and infinite by
nature.

This perfect love is an appreciation and admiration for the other
persons of the Godhead. This directed toward who they are and what they
do.

This perfect love is infinitely fantastic, and the greatest treasure of
all time and out of time.

When God observed mankind in total depravity, He moved to save them in
order to provide for them the greatest treasure of all time and out of
time, a love relationship with Him.

But the love of God had to overcome the sinfulness of man without
compromising His own holiness. He could not give the greatest treasure
to the those who were unfit because of the ravages of sin.

Therefore, Christ, the God-man. The unique person of the universe.

God gave His only born Son.

The aorist tense of didomi again takes us back to a moment of time in
eternity past, when God made the decision to give His Son.

Giving is a real lightweight idea for what God did. It was sacrifice,
plain and simple. From His foreknowledge, God knew exactly what the
sending of His Son entailed.

The sacrifice included at the least a change in status. By limiting His
capabilities and character, Christ limited His old relationship with the
Father and the Spirit, Phil 2:58.

The sacrifice included the utter separation of the cross. The physical
pain, was something, but the spiritual was far more. Eloi, Eloi, lama
sabachthani?

The adjective ***monogenes*** reveals a couple of things about Christ.

Christ is the only born Son of God. Not the first born, with others to
follow, but the only born.

Christ is the God-man in hypostatic union, and is therefore unique in
all the universe. He was truly one of a kind. And yet God was willing to
sacrifice Him.

This was an incredibly painful sacrifice! And from it we gain an idea of
the virtue of God: of how very much He values His own love, and what He
would do to bring it to His own creatures who stand without it.

The sacrifice of Christ was a universal one He died for all the sins of
all mankind, it was unlimited atonement. 1 John 2:1.

God’s intent is to save the human race from perishing. This perishing is
eternity in the Lake of Fire.

People choose to go to hell. It is an option in life, and those who
reject God and the Gospel choose the Lake of Fire. Unlimited atonement
makes eternal punishment just.

The Lake of Fire is the final destination for both fallen angels and
unbelieving mankind. It was prepared in angelic prehistory at the
judgment of the fallen angels, Matt. 25:41, “Then He will also say to
those on His left, ‘Depart from me, accursed ones, into the eternal fire
which has been prepared for the devil and his angels.’”

The first occupants of the Lake of Fire will be the beast and the false
prophet of the Tribulation, Rev 19:20, “And the beast was seized, and
with him the false prophet who performed the signs in his presence, by
which he deceived those who had received the mark of the beast and those
who worshiped his image; these two were thrown alive into the lake of
fire which burns with brimstone.”

Next will be Satan himself, Rev 20:20, “And the devil who deceived them
was thrown into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the
false prophet are also; and they will be tormented day and night forever
and ever.”

After the judgment of Satan, all unbelievers are judged and cast into
the Lake of Fire. This is the judgment of the Great White Throne, Rev
20:1415, “And death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is
the second death, the lake of fire. And if anyone’s name was not found
written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.”

Specific mention is made of sinners who are especially heinous, Rev
21:8, “But for the cowardly and unbelieving and abominable and murderers
and immoral persons and sorcerers and idolaters and all liars, their
part [fate] is in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is
the second death.” This mention is made so that we believers might gain
a greater appreciation of divine justice related to unbelievers.

There is no way out.

**John 3:18,36**“He who believes in Him is not judged; he who does not
believe has been judged already, because he has not believed in the name
of the only begotten Son of God. He who believes in the Son has eternal
life; but he who does not obey the Son shall not see life, but the wrath
of God abides on him.”

**Heb 9:27**, “And inasmuch as it is appointed for men to die once and
after this comes judgment.”

The lake of fire is modeled after an old place of sacrifice just South
of Jerusalem. It was called Gehenna. Gehenna is synonymous with the
valley of the sons of Hinnom, or BenHinnom.

The valley of Gehenna was a place of child sacrifice, where babies were
thrown into a fire, 2 Kings 16:3; 21:6.

Jeremiah 7:32; and 19:6 set this place as a place of discipline for
Judah.

Christ often uses Gehenna to describe eternal punishment, Matt 10:28;
13:40,42,50; 25:41,46; Mark 9:43, 45, 4749.

The alternative to the Lake of Fire is Eternal Life. What is the
difference? The sacrifice of human pride. This is why so many choose the
Lake of Fire. It seems such an incredible thing that people would do
this, but they do!

Note that we begin in judgment, and can choose to get out from under it
by believing in Jesus Christ, but we cannot escape that judgment if we
reject Him.

This is a literal lake of fire… Christ and all the other writers of
Scripture portray it as such. This is not a metaphor, not simply an
illustration, not something used to scare us, but does not really exist
[if you don’t clean your room, the boogie man is going to get you!], not
anything other than what it is, a place of eternal punishment.

Hell is not just eternal separation from God; it is much, much more. It
is eternal, burning pain, for the fires of hell do not consume the
resurrection bodies of the damned. This form of punishment is
appropriate for those arrogant enough to reject the Grace Offer of God.
It is the arrogance of those who equate themselves with God; of those
who deny their need for God.

From the perspective of the eternal state we will observe the justice of
God, and understand fully His action in carrying out the sentencings to
Hell. If it seems harsh now, then learn more about God, and you will
know.

The alternative to perishing is eternal life (really brief review).

Verse 17, “For God did not send the Son into the world to judge the
world, but to save the world through Him.”

This is a crucial verse on divine motivation and character.

It reveals God in the best possible light; that His motive in sending
His Son was the highest and purest form of love.

Have you ever encountered an unbeliever who was offended at the idea of
hell? That a loving God could never send anyone to eternal damnation?
Well, this verse is certainly for them.

There are two things that a loving God would never do:

The first would be to leave anyone in condemnation without the
possibility of redemption;

The second would be to force anyone to accept that offer of redemption.

So God sent His Son to die for the sins of mankind, and you should
certainly consider the grave nature of this sacrifice as a vital symbol
of God’s earnest desire to save mankind. He gave His unique and only Son
on our behalf.

For “God is not willing for any to perish but for all to come to
repentance.” (2 Peter 3:9)

Therefore, God does not gleefully rub together His hands in anticipation
of the final judgment; every lost soul grieves Him.

Yet, Christ will judge believers and unbelievers alike. (see doctrine of
judgments).

Verse 18, “the one who believes in Him is not judged; but the one who
does not believe has already been judged, because he has not believed in
the name of the only born Son of God.”

This verse is best seen in the light of the doctrine of imputations
(reference).

At its simplest foundation, this verse says that people are brought into
this life in a state of condemnation, and brought out of that state by
belief in Christ.

Believers are still evaluated at the judgment seat of Christ; but the
salvation issue is certainly no longer a question.

Verse 19, “and this is the judgment: that the light shone in the world
and men loved the darkness more than the light; for their works were
evil.”

John now goes back to the big picture. In a wistful manner he summarizes
the life of Christ.

The light shone in the world; this is a one-sentence review of John
1:15.

Men loved the darkness more than the light; this sounds a little like
John 1:5, but there is a distinction. In the earlier verse there is a
concentration on the efforts of the darkness to destroy the light; in
the later verse, an explanation of why the men of darkness rejected the
light.

The explanation is that their works were evil.

Perhaps a quote from one of John’s epistles will explain it best: 1 John
2:1517.

Do not love the cosmic system nor the things in the cosmic system. If
anyone loves the cosmic system, the love of the Father is not in him.

The first part of this verse is command and warning to abstain from
having high esteem for the cosmic system.

If you have high esteem for the cosmic system, that is, if you like
being involved in it, then you are not in spiritual adulthood.

You cannot enjoy being in the cosmic system and be a spiritual adult at
the same time.

The cosmic system is the enemy and opposite of God the Father’s plan for
your life.

If you are in the cosmic system, then you are an enemy of God, even
though you may be a believer.

Because everything that is in the cosmic system, the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes and the arrogance of life, is not a part of the
Father but is a part of the cosmic system.

John divides the cosmic system into three categories: lust of the flesh,
lust of the eyes, and the arrogance of life. See the genius in this.

There is a kind of lust that comes from within the body sexual lust.

The lust of the eyes is materialism what things in life that you desire.

And then there is a generic arrogance of life.

And yet the world and its lust is deceiving itself, but the one who does
the will of God remains forever.

Again, the cosmic system and its components cause self-deception and
self-destruction in the cycle of lust and unhappiness.

Those believers who get involved in the cosmic system lose their rewards
for eternity even though they still have eternal life.

By contrast, those believers who stick it out in the plan of God have
not only eternal life, but a fantastic system of rewards as well.

Tragically, those who refuse to believe in Christ do not have eternal
life, but instead are cast into the lake of fire.

A conclusion: people remain in darkness because somehow they love what
is there and what they do there. Some people loathe the darkness and so
come into the light.

Verse 20, “For each one who practices worthlessness hates the light and
does not come to the light, so that his works might not be exposed.”

Worthlessness is PHAULOS, the word which means even in the Greek out of
bounds.’

Some things are obviously out of bounds, like many evil sins and acts.
Murder would be a good example for this.

Other things are not so obvious, such as the right thing done for the
wrong reason. God looks on the heart, and probes our motives for doing
good things.

We can do good things because we love Him and are responding to His
love; or, we can do good things because we are trying to impress God
with our own brand of righteousness. The latter is certainly PHAULOS.

Let me emphasize the practice. This shows a consistent pattern of
behavior that is uncaring about sin.

Someone who cares about resisting temptation will not only fight and
scratch and bleed in the war against sin, but they will also acquire all
the defenses that they possibly can through their study of Bible truth.

And not only this, but someone who cares about sin will confess that sin
as soon as they possibly can.

And this person who practices worthlessness does not come into the
light; that is, he does not regularly expose his soul to the truth. This
is because that exposure will cause him to leave behind what he loves so
much.

Verse 21, “And the one who practices the truth comes to the light, in
order that his works by be shown that have been made in God.”

But the one who practices the truth must get the truth on a regular
basis, even every day to do so.

Coming to the light is that very thing exposure to the truth.

Coming to the light gives you the opportunity to practice the truth, and
once you practice the truth you have every reason to return to that
exposure of light, because it places you in a very excellent standing
you are fulfilling the plan of God!

Imputations

**Romans 3:19-20**, “Now we know that whatever the Law says, it speaks
to those who are under the Law, that every mouth may be closed, and all
the world may be accountable to God; because by the works of the Law no
flesh shall be justified in His sight; for by the Law is the knowledge
of sin.”

**1 Timothy 1:9-10**, “Realizing this fact that the Law was not made for
a righteous man, but for those who are lawless and rebellious, for the
ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for those who murder
their fathers and mothers, for murderers in general, for fornicators and
homosexuals, for kidnappers and liars and perjurers, and whatever else
is contrary to sound doctrine.”

The Mosaic Law defines sin for both unbelievers and believers.

Galatians 3:2426, “Therefore what is the purpose of the Law? It has
become our tutor to lead us to Christ, that we might be justified by
faith. But now that faith has come, we are no longer under the tutor.
For you are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus.”

The purpose of the Law to the unbeliever is:

-   To reveal sin, but not to remove it.

-   To reveal sin, but not to prevent it.

-   To prove all human beings as sinners, but it was not a standard by
    which one might prove himself holy.

The Law was added because of transgressions.

**Galatians 3:19**, “Therefore why the Law? It was added to grace
because of the transgressions, until from whom came the seed in what
form it had been promised, having been ordained through angels by the
hand of a mediator.”

The Law was added to the Old Testament portfolio of grace because of the
transgressions, or personal sins of those in that time.

The Law bridged the gap between Moses and Christ. Christ is the seed,
who came in the form of a man.

He was ordained through angels by their great pronouncement on the night
He was born.

Though the Law was ordained to life, it is a sentence to death, Romans
7:10, “and this commandment, which was to result in life, proved to
result in death for me;”

Therefore, the Law is a minister of condemnation, and not of
spirituality.

**2 Cor 3:68**, “…who also made us adequate as servants of a new
covenant, not of the letter, but of the Spirit; for the letter kills,
but the Spirit gives life. But if the ministry of death, in letters
engraved on stones, came with glory, so that the sons of Israel could
not look intently at the face of Moses because of the glory of his face,
fading as it was, how shall the ministry of the Spirit fail to be even
more with glory?”

A Study of Romans 5:12-21:

**Rom. 5:12** “Therefore, just as through one man sin entered into the
world, and death through sin, so also death went to all men, on the
basis of which all sinned”

Sin entered the world through Adam. Note, however, that this is for the
human race. Sin originally entered the world through Satan.

Spiritual death entered the world through sin. Spiritual death is
separation from God due to His holiness and your sinful state; it is
total helplessness to remedy the situation.

Spiritual death went to all men by the imputation of Adam’s original sin
to the genetically formed old sin nature.

The result of this is that all men are considered to have sinned. EPI HO
should be translated ‘on the basis of which’ not ‘because’

This is not a raw deal! It is the best deal that mankind ever received!

**Rom. 5:13** " now before the Law, sin was in the world; but sin is not
imputed while there is no Law."

The first half of this verse relates something so obvious it is almost
embarrassing: that sin was in the world before the time of the Mosaic
Law.

The preposition ACHRI with the genitive case can show time until, or
also time before; here it is the latter.

The contrasting statement is in the second half of the verse. That sin
is not imputed while there is no Law. Ultimately, God is fair.

All the personal sins of the world were imputed to Christ while He was
on the cross.

**1 John 2:1-2**, “My dear children, I write this to you so that you
might not sin. But if anyone does sin, we have one who speaks to the
Father in our defense Jesus Christ, the Righteous One. He is the atoning
sacrifice for our sins, and not only for ours but also for the sins of
the whole world.”

**2 Corinthians 5:14-15**, “For Christ’s love compels us, because we are
convinced that one died for all, and therefore all died. And He died for
all, that those who live should no longer live for themselves but for
him who died for them and was raised again.”

**1 Timothy 2:6**, “who gave himself as a ransom for all men the
testimony given in its proper time.”

**Titus 2:11**, “For the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared
to all men.”

Even before the cross this was considered as true, because of the
veracity of God. He is always faithful to His word.

Condemnation comes not because of personal sin, but because of Adam’s
original sin (see later reference). The imputation of Adam’s original
sin causes a condemnation that can only be abrogated by belief in
Christ.

The last half of this verse does not refer to personal sin, which is all
imputed to Christ while He is on the cross.

The last half of this verse does not refer to the sin nature, which is
transmitted genetically and thus not a part of the imputation plan.

**Psalm 51:5**, “Surely I was born in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me.”

Therefore this imputation can only be Adam’s original sin. And isn’t
that the subject of this passage anyway?

This applies to all who have not reached the age of God-consciousness.

The Law brought God consciousness and a whole lot more; it brought a
knowledge of sin; of imputations; of the perfect character of God; of
the future work of Christ.

In other words, the Law made an issue out of the gospel for all who
encountered it.

Children before a certain age do not have God consciousness; the
mentally retarded may never gain it.

Before the Law came it was much more difficult to come to God
consciousness. There was no written code or ritual which taught sin and
the work of Christ.

This does not, however, mean that there was no condemnation or
imputation of Adam’s original sin. Far from it. For both spiritual death
and salvation by faith are dispensational constants since Adam.

The two statements of verse thirteen do not say that there was no gospel
before the Law came!

There was spiritual death in the time between Adam and Moses. It is just
that the Law made it so much easier to come to God-consciousness that it
increased spiritual death.

There is a verse which should make this passage a little clearer.

**2 Peter 2:21**, “It would have been better for them not to have known
the way of righteousness, than to have known it and then to turn their
backs on the sacred commandment that was passed on to them.”

**Rom. 5:14,** “Nonetheless death reigned from Adam until Moses, even
over those who had not sinned in the likeness of the offense of Adam,
who is a type of Him who was to come.”

Spiritual death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those who had not
sinned in the likeness of the offense of Adam.

This does not mean, however, that spiritual death then ceased to reign
after the introduction of the Mosaic Law. In fact, spiritual death still
reigns today, even after the accomplishments of the cross and the
resurrection.

Adam was a type of Christ. He was born into a state of perfection no sin
nature, and no condemnation.

He was a crucial part of the imputation plan of God. The sin of Adam was
imputed to all mankind, as the sin of all mankind was imputed to Christ.

It is on the basis of our persistent rejection of the gospel that we are
in the end condemned to the Lake of Fire.

**John 3:18**, “He who believes in Him is not judged; he who does not
believe has been judged already, because he has not believed in the name
of the only begotten Son of God.”

You are judged already because of the imputation of Adam’s original sin.

If you never came to God consciousness, Adam’s sin was never imputed to
you, and so you were never condemned.

**John 3:36**, “He who believes in the Son has eternal life; but he who
does not believe the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides
on him.”

The wrath of God abides on you because you previously received the
imputation of Adam’s original sin, which caused your condemnation.

If you never came to God consciousness you never received the sin of
Adam and resultant condemnation.

It did not matter how those in the time between Adam and Moses sinned,
but whether they believed in Jesus Christ.

Spiritual death continued to reign because there are other ways to come
to God consciousness than through the Mosaic Law. Although the Mosaic
Law was quite effective in this regard, there are other ways.

**Romans 1:20**, “For since the creation of the world God’s invisible
qualities his eternal power and divine nature have been clearly seen,
being understood from what has been made, so that men are without
excuse.”

**The Religious Argument.** The religious argument contends that God
exists because mankind universally believe in His existence. Creatures
do not crave what does not exist, and men seek after God. Even religious
instincts indicate the reality of a Supreme Being. The concept of man
seeking God is found in Jeremiah 29:13, and Acts 17:27.

**The Moral or Anthropological Argument.** This argument says that to a
greater or lesser degree man’s soul possesses both volition and
conscience with an urge to choose right over wrong. This phenomena has
no explanation apart from the existence and influence of a Supreme Being
with perfect and eternal holiness or integrity. A material, ungoverned
universe can know nothing of moral values apart from the absolute
righteousness of a Supreme Being. Acknowledging the existence of virtue
and truth eventuates in becoming aware of the source of virtue and
truth. Jesus said, “I am the truth…no man comes unto the Father but by
Me.”

**The Ontological Argument.** Ontological reasoning says that since the
human mind possesses the idea of a perfect and absolute being, such a
being must exist. Apart from the religious and moral tendencies, the
existence of God is a necessary idea to the human intellect, and beyond
the relative which mankind measures there is the absolute which gives
value and character to the relative.

**The Teleological Argument.** This argument is the fact that the
universe, by its telescopic and microscopic wonders, always form
arrangement, purpose, and adaptation, which connotes a designer.
Structure in the universe demands a designer. The more we discover about
the perfect structure of the universe in science, the more we recognize
the need for a designer. Romans 1:20. The order of the universe can no
more be accidental than the shuffling of twenty-six letters of the
alphabet into a beautiful poem. The chemical contents of the human body
are never accidentally combined to form man.

**The Cosmological Argument.** This reasoning states that the intuitive
law of cause and effect demands the existence of God as the initial
cause. Order in the universe demands both a creator and a preserver. The
universe presents an overwhelming demand for belief in the existence of
God.

**John 1:3**, speaking of Jesus Christ as eternal God, says, “All things
came into being through Him, and apart from Him nothing came into being
that has come into being.”

**Colossians 1:16-17**teaches that Jesus Christ is not only the creator
of the universe, but that He also holds it together for the perpetuation
of human history until the end of the Millennium, “For by Him were all
things created both in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible,
whether thrones or empires or rulers or authorities. All things have
been created through Him and for Him. He has existed prior to all things
and by Him all things hold together.”

**Hebrews 1:10**, “In the beginning, O Lord [Jesus Christ], You laid the
foundations of the earth and the heavens are the workmanship of Your
hands.”

**Hebrews 1:3**, “He upholds all things by the word of His power.”

**Rom. 5:15**, “But the free gift is not like the transgression. For if
by the transgression of the one the many died, much more did the grace
of God and the gift by the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, abound to
the many.”

This contains the simple and just formula of imputation.

Many, but not all died in Adam. Some who never reached God consciousness
did not.

Christ died for the sins of all.

As a result, those who never reach God consciousness are automatically
saved, while those who believe in Christ are saved by the work of
Christ. This is the many.

While Christ died for all in unlimited atonement, not all are saved.
Only many.

**Rom. 5:16**, “And the gift is not like that which came through the one
who sinned; for on the one hand the judgment arose from one resulting in
condemnation, but on the other hand the free gift from the many
transgressions resulting in justification.”

A contrast between Adam’s original sin and the atoning sacrifice of
Christ.

The judgment is the imputation of Adam’s original sin; it is synonymous
with the imputation in verse thirteen. An imputation is a divine
judgment.

The result of the imputation of Adam’s sin is condemnation.

The free gift came from the imputation of all the sins of mankind being
imputed to the body of Christ on the cross. The imputation of the free
gift to the one who believes results in justification.

The true nature of the free gift is the righteousness of Christ that
same righteousness that He produced by dying for the sins of man.

**John 3:18**, “He who believes in Him is not judged; he who does not
believe has been judged already, because he has not believed in the name
of the only begotten Son of God.”

**John 3:36**, “He who believes in the Son has eternal life; but he who
does not believe the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides
on him.”

**Rom. 5:17**, “For if by the transgression of the one, death reigned
through the one, much more those who receive the abundance of grace and
of the gift of righteousness will reign in life through the One, Jesus
Christ.”

Death reigned through the imputation of the original sin of Adam.

We should reign in life through the One, Jesus Christ. There two good
explanations of the reign of life in this verse:

Our reign over the sin nature, which is spiritual adulthood to spiritual
maturity.

Our reign with Christ in the millennium.

If we do the first, we will have the second.

Christ is the prince-ruler of the church, and will be the king of kings
and Lord of lords starting at the second advent.

We can share in Christ’s victory in operation footstool through our
advance in the protocol plan for the church age.

**Rom. 5:18**, “Therefore a conclusion: as through one transgression all
men tend to condemnation, so also through one act of righteousness all
men tend to justification of life.”

This is an exact parallelism. In order for God to be perfectly just in
His imputations, there must be perfect balance present. The exact
parallelism is denoted by the use of HOS in the first clause and HOUTOS
KAI in the second. They are translated, ‘as… so also’.

The second one first: not all men are saved, and that is not what this
verse says. Salvation is hardly automatic.

Instead, the double use of the preposition EIS in this clause functions
to show a tendency toward something, which is justification through the
righteousness of Christ. This double EIS without the verb is unique to
Greek literature.

So our translation: ‘through one act of righteousness all men tend to
justification of life.’

Not all men fulfill this purpose of God, because God gave all men free
will.

The first one second: If not all men are saved by the atoning sacrifice
of Christ, then certainly not all men are condemned through Adam’s
original sin.

Remember, this is an exact parallel. Therefore, if you believe that
unlimited atonement leads not all to salvation, you must also believe
that Adam’s original sin cannot be imputed to all.

Adam’s original sin may only fairly be imputed to those who have God
consciousness; anything less would violate the integrity of God. God
never arbitrarily condemns anyone!

This is the true volitional view!

**Rom. 5:19**, “For just as through the one man’s disobedience the many
were appointed sinners, even so through the obedience of the One the
many will be appointed righteous.”

Notice the word HOI POLLOI. It is the Greek word ‘many’.

Again there is an exact parallel between the two clauses of this verse.
This time that parallel is formed by HOSPER… HOUTOS. The translation is
‘just as… even so’.

Again we will take the second clause first: through the obedience of the
One many will be appointed righteous.

‘Many’ is perfectly accurate! Not all are saved through the work of
Christ. Many are saved, and in fact many are not!

The obedience of Christ resulted in unlimited atonement. However, God
still honors volitional decisions!

Although through the work of Christ all men tend toward justification,
not all receive it.

And the first clause last: through one man’s disobedience the many were
appointed sinners.

Many, but not all are appointed sinners.

Although all men tend to condemnation, not all receive it.

Adam’s original sin is only imputed at God consciousness!

**Rom. 5:20,21**, “And the Law came in that the transgression might
increase; but where the sin increased, grace abounded all the more,
that, as sin reigned in death even so grace might reign through
righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.”

The purpose of the Law was so that God consciousness might increase. The
Law is superb at that function.

**Romans 3:19-20**, “Now we know that whatever the Law says, it speaks
to those who are under the Law, that every mouth may be closed, and all
the world may be accountable [HUPODIKOS] to God; because by the works of
the Law no flesh shall be justified in His sight; for by the Law is the
knowledge [EPIGNOSIS] of sin.”

**Galatians 3:24-26**, “Therefore what is the purpose of the Law? It has
become our tutor to lead us to Christ, that we might be justified by
faith. But now that faith has come, we are no longer under the tutor.
For you are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus.”

This is because wherever Adam’s original sin is imputed, there is an
amplification of grace.

God is glorified each time someone believes in Christ.

The imputation of Adam’s original sin makes that a possibility.

The reign of grace is again the process of spiritual growth to maturity.
Salvation makes the reign of grace possible!

When someone goes to heaven by default, there is some glorification of
God because it is a display of the work of Christ through unlimited
atonement.

When someone chooses Christ from the status of condemnation, there is
greater grace. This is the subject of Paul’s conclusion.

**Romans 6:5-6,** “For if we have become united with Him in the likeness
of His death, certainly we shall be also in the likeness of His
resurrection, knowing this, that our old man was crucified with Him,
that our body of sin might be done away with, that we should no longer
be slaves to sin…”

The old sin nature was crucified with Christ on the cross.

As a result, it cannot be a basis for condemnation.

The Old Sin Nature is transmitted genetically through the seed of Adam.
It provides temptation to the soul, James 1:1415.

This context concerns the post salvation effect of Christ’s payment for
the old sin nature.

**Romans 4:15**, "For the Law produces wrath; but where there is no Law,
neither is there transgression (original sin).

Naturally, this can lead to no small amount of confusion.

Pay attention to the word PARABASIS. Paul employs it to denote original
sin!

#### Romans 5:14

1 Timothy 2:14 (the woman’s original sin).

The Law (as the gospel) brings wrath from God because of the imputation
of Adam’s original sin and subsequent condemnation.

But if there is no Law yet on the heart, there is no Adam’s original
sin.

This does not mean that if you sin in ignorance of the Law, there is no
sin! That notion would offend any Jew who knew of the Law of burnt
offerings in Leviticus chapter four. The first half of that chapter is
about the sacrifices which must be made for sins done in ignorance.

This is a distinct reinforcement of Romans 5:13b, ’but sin is not
imputed while there is no Law."

**Romans 7:9-11**, "but I was then continuously alive apart from the
Law, but after the commandment came, sin sprang to life, and I died, and
the commandment resulting in life was found in me, this resulting in
death. For the sin, after taking the opportunity through the commandment
deceived me and through it killed me.

The previous two verses form the immediate context: “Therefore what will
we say? The Law is sin? Definitely not! But I would not have known sin
except through the Law; for I would not have known about coveting unless
the Law was saying”You will not covet." But sin, after taking an
opportunity through the commandment produced in me every kind of lust.
For apart from the Law sin is dead"

The Law is not sin, but it brings knowledge of sin. With the knowledge
of sin comes the ability to sin knowingly.

Therefore without the Law sin is powerless. Because knowledge of sin
brings power to sin.

Therefore the Law gives voice to the sin nature. The sin nature develops
a vocabulary and broader frame of reference through the Law’s defining
of sin.

Paul says he was continuously alive apart from the Law that is, that
before he knew of the Law he was spiritually alive. The imperfect tense
of ZAO portrays past continuous action.

At some time in the past Paul was continuously alive.

This was the time before he knew the Law, as indicated by the second
clause.

Human life is not an issue in this passage. The subject is neither human
life nor death.

If the subject is figurative life, there is only one figurative life
that it could be; spiritual life.

Now again, Paul is saying that he was spiritually alive before the Law
came into his life.

After the commandment came, sin sprang to life. Just which commandment
is defined by the end of verse ten; it is the commandment which results
in life which could only be the gospel.

So the commandment which results in life causes sin to spring to life,
which in turn brings about spiritual death.

Therefore each human life is a miniature copy of the history of sin.
Each one is born into innocence.

The category of sin in view here is however the sin nature. The sin
nature lies dormant in the flesh until such time as it develops a
vocabulary and frame of reference.

The vocabulary and frame of reference of the sin nature can only come
through the Law of God, whether through natural means or through the
Pentateuch.

-   Natural means number one: the conscience.

-   Natural means number two: parents.

-   Natural means number three: other institutions of authority.

The amplification of the Pentateuch in the New Testament may also be a
source of the Law for this purpose.

The knowledge which comes by these means may be knowledge of God, direct
prohibitions against sin, or the Gospel itself.

The sin nature does not act ignorantly or blindly; it acts through
cognizance.

Therefore knowledge of the Law of God activates the sin nature.

The activation of the sin nature brings the imputation of Adam’s
Original Sin, and thus condemnation: spiritual death.

The final clause of verse ten explain this with clarity: HE ENTOLE HE
EIS ZOEN, HAUTE EIS THANATON.

A very literal translation would say, "the commandment which is unto
life, this is unto death.

There are many uses of the preposition EIS in the Koine’ Greek of the
New Testament; the obvious use here is as something which points to the
result of an action or incident.

Therefore, there is a commandment which results in life.

And, this same commandment results in death.

The demonstrative pronoun HAUTE points back to the antecedent ENTOLE. It
is worthwhile to note that the same commandment which results in life
also results in death.

There is only one commandment that can result in life. It is the
commandment to believe in Jesus Christ.

So listen again to Paul’s order:

He was continuously alive apart from the Law.

The commandment came and sin [the sin nature] sprang to life.

Then came spiritual death.

This possibility sees Paul’s continuous spiritual life as post
salvation.

The death in the verse would then be temporary spiritual death, or loss
of fellowship.

The hearing of the commandment would be anytime that you add a new
‘nono’ to the categories of your soul.

The failure of this interpretation is threefold: the sin nature is alive
and well long before salvation, so it does not spring to life each time
something new is learned; the death is very obviously the imputation of
Adam’s Sin; and the continuous life is not an accurate representation of
the spiritual dynamics of the Christian life.

The continuous life is life in the womb interpretation.

This possibility sees the continuous life as the biological life in the
womb, with the imputation of Adam’s sin at birth.

However, this immediately falls apart when you realize that there is no
God consciousness for many months after birth, and that the crux of this
passage has to with the knowledge of God, sin, and the gospel.

This view completely fails to account for the gap between human birth
and God, and so must be discounted.

The only option remaining is the one we have discussed.

#### The Essence of Adam’s Sin:

Adam’s Original Sin is imputed at God consciousness, but before any
personal sin is committed.

On the basis of Adam’s Sin, each one receives condemnation which is
tantamount to spiritual death. This is the point at which separation
from God is initiated.

Only because Adam’s Sin is imputed before any personal sin is committed
is there the allowance of a just imputation of personal sin to Jesus
Christ.

Whether the child believes in the gospel at this time is not an issue;
the sin is always imputed before any personal sin is committed, and
before there is a chance to express belief in Jesus Christ.

In other words, there is no chance of continue perfection. The sin of
Adam is imputed before anything else can occur.

The results of the imputation.

Therefore, each human being is a model in miniature of the life of Adam,
and even before Adam, of Satan.

There is creature innocence, knowledge, and then sin.

But unlike Adam and Satan, there is condemnation before the commitment
of personal sins.

This early condemnation is what allows God to impute our personal sins
to Christ, and thus it also makes volition the issue.

This also allows for the perfection of Jesus Christ, because He had no
sin nature and no sin before His God consciousness.

With no sin nature, God could not impute Adam’s Sin to His Son.

Therefore, Christ had to remain perfect throughout His life, or suffer
eternal separation from the Father. The stakes were indeed high.

The imputation of Adam’s sin at God-consciousness means that there is no
condemnation or spiritual death before that time. In fact, there is
spiritual life until that time.

Since there is no condemnation or spiritual death before that time, it
is clear that God is able to save those individuals without the
compromise of His justice.

There is no need for the imputation of the personal sins to Christ of
those who do not reach God consciousness, because there is no sine
without God consciousness. Therefore, there are no sins that need to be
imputed!

At God consciousness, if the knowledge of God and sin are rejected, then
certain things occur immediately. Remember, condemnation from Adam’s sin
occurs before there is a chance to consider the gospel.

Romans 1:21, “Therefore, though they knew God, they did not honor Him as
God, or give thanks; but they became vacuous in their speculations, and
their foolish heart was darkened.”

Remember the two preceding verses are specifically about God
consciousness.

This sounds remarkably like an entrance into the very first stage of the
cosmic system, and so it is.

Ephesians 4:1719, “This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that
you walk no longer just as the unbelievers also walk, in the vacuum of
their mind, being continually darkened in their understanding, excluded
from the life of God, because of the ignorance, the being in them,
because of the hardness of their heart; and they, having become callous,
have given themselves over to sensuality, for the practice of every kind
of impurity with greediness.”

Distinctions of early life.

In the womb, there is biological life but no soul life. Though there is
a sin nature, it is dormant.

The soul and spirit are imputed at birth; there is human life and
spiritual life but no consciousness of God (see Psalm 8:2). There is a
sin nature, but it is still dormant.

Between birth and God consciousness there are three basic needs of every
infant:

There are physical needs, including food, clothing, shelter, and even
comfort.

There is the need to explore and accumulate knowledge.

There is a need for love and affection.

If the basic needs of an infant are consistently met, then it will be a
happy child.

The means for God consciousness vary, and Paul even indicates that the
state may be achieved by learning one of the ten commandments.

Those responsible for an infant are responsible to meet his or her needs
consistently and personally.

The expression of displeasure by an infant who has not reached God
consciousness is simply related to its needs, and not a rejection of the
authority of his or her parents or guardians.

This expression of displeasure is definitely not sin. It is absolutely
necessary that the an infant at this time communicate to his caretakers
about his needs.

The expression of displeasure is the way an infant does this, and this
cannot be classified as sin.

At the moment of God consciousness, the sin of Adam is imputed,
spiritual death ensues (loss of the human spirit) the sin nature
activates, and the child enters the cosmic system.

Three Psalms:

Psalm 51:5, see David’s Bastardship.

Psalm 58:3, “The wicked go astray from the womb; they err from their
birth, continually speaking lies.”

This Psalm has been quoted as support for the imputation of Adam’s sin
at birth.

But observe: this Psalm is an imprecation against the wicked of the
world. The sixth verse says, “O God, shatter their teeth in their mouth;
break out the fangs of the young lions, O Lord.”

It is a Psalm exclusive about the wicked of the world and their
behavior; in no way is it intended to describe the entire human race.

Therefore, when the third verse makes its axioms, those axioms apply
exclusively to the wicked, and definitely not to the entire human race.

And therefore, the verse does not have the imputation of Adam’s Sin as
its subject.

This point becomes clear from a study of the original Hebrew:

The first verb is the qal perfect ZORU, which is translated ‘go astray’.

The perfect tense communicates an axiom that is always true about the
wicked of this world.

The verb itself usually denotes the literal separation of a blood
relationship, and is the same verb employed in Psalm 69:8 to describe
David’s blood separation from his own brothers. Here however it
illustrates the spiritual separation between the wicked and God.

The wicked produce the action of this verb; that is, they go astray
under their own power, and not because of their sin nature or because of
the imputation of Adam’s Sin.

They go astray from the womb; the phrase is MERAHEM, and it is a synonym
for birth.

Now of course this is a hyperbole. David is trying to communicate a
point by exaggeration.

The hyperbole is a common figure of speech in the Bible, and has
persisted throughout history and almost all languages and cultures. It
draws attention to the degree of something by overstating the case.

“They go astray from birth” is another way of saying that they are
sinning at the earliest age possible.

The second verb is TA\`U, and it also is a qal perfect verb.

Again the perfect tense is axiomatic; it describes something that is
always true about the wicked.

The verb itself depicts someone who wanders about aimlessly; it is the
perfect picture of the drunk, and Isaiah employs it that way in Isaiah
28:7.

It also depicts someone who wanders away from the Law of God.

The subject of this verb is the wicked, and it produces the action of
the verb. It is an accurate portrayal of volition producing personal
sin, and nothing else.

The combination of preposition and noun MIBETEN also describes that the
action takes place immediately after birth, but note that this also is a
hyperbole.

Example of hyperbole: “Christ paid for the trillions of sins that I have
produced in my lifetime.”

I have committed a lot of sins in my lifetime.

I have not committed a trillion sins.

In order to illustrate the great number of my sins, I used an
outrageously large figure.

Biblical examples of hyperbole:

**Deuteronomy 1:28**, “The cities are great, and walled up to heaven,”
to express their great height.

**Judges 20:16**, “Every one could sling stones at a hair and not miss”
to describe the wonderful proficiency which the Benjamites had attained
in slinging stones."

**1 Kings 1:40**, “So that the earth rent with the sound of them.” A
hyperbolical description of their jumping and leaping for joy.

**John 3:26**, “All men come to him” Thus his disciples said to John, to
show their sense of the many people who followed the Lord.

Now think this through:

This is about the wicked only, and applies to the wicked only.

The wicked their lives of personal sin at the earliest possible time;
the double hyperbole does not communicate that the wicked are sinning at
the moment they are born; nor do the two parallel verbs explain the sin
nature or the imputation of Adam’s Sin, but only the production of
personal sin.

If David had wanted to convey the idea of the old sin nature, then the
wicked could not have been the subject of the two parallel statements.
He could have employed the term ‘lust’ or ‘temptation’ to do so, but
certainly no human being produces his own temptation through his own
volition.

If David had wanted to convey the idea of the imputation of Adam’s Sin,
he would have had God as his subject, or made the wicked the recipients
of the action of the verb.

The final conclusion? That this verse is a hyperbole about the
activation of the sin nature in the wicked at the youngest age possible.

**Psalm 8:2**, “You have built a fortress from the mouth of children and
infants because of your foes, to stop your enemies and adversaries.”

God builds a fortress from the mouth of babes and infants.

The word for ‘children’ is \`OLELIM. It denotes a child of any age, but
one who is definitely a child.

The word for ‘infants’ is YONQIM, which is literally a ‘sucking one’.
This is the infant who is still at the breast.

The fortress is defined well from Matthew, where we find that it is a
fortress of praise.

**Matthew 21:12-16**, “And Jesus entered the temple and cast out all
those who were buying and selling in the temple, and overturned the
tables of the moneychangers and the seats of those who were selling
doves. And He said to them, ‘It is written, My house shall be called a
house of prayer; but you are making it a robbers den.’ And the blind and
the lame came to Him in the temple, and He healed them. But when the
chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful things that He had done,
and the children who were crying out in the temple and saying, ‘Hosanna
to the Son of David,’ they became indignant, and said to Him, ‘Do You
hear what these are saying?’ And Jesus said to them, ‘Yes; have you
never read, Out of the mouth of infants and nursing babes You have
prepared praise for Yourself?’”

The reference to infants is of course a hyperbole again; infants are
incapable of speech. The hyperbole means again that the praise comes at
the youngest possible age.

Children also build a fortress of praise to God. The children in the
temple on that day were perceptive enough to realize that Christ was
truly the king of the Jews after the pattern of David.

Children do this because they are young, inexperienced, and uneducated,
yet they are fully capable of giving praise to God. Now that confounds
the enemies of God!

It confounds the enemies of God, because it illustrates the concept of
spiritual I.Q.

Spiritual I.Q. has its foundation in the wisdom of God and the power of
the Spirit. It has no foundation in education or experience outside of
the necessary vocabulary.

Children can praise God as well as anyone; they are enabled by God the
Holy Spirit to do so.

This does not rule out the necessary doctrinal content of praise.
Children must have doctrine to bring praise to God.

**1 Corinthians 1:26-29**,“For consider your calling, brethren, that
there were not many wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble; but god has chosen the foolish things of the world to shame
the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world to shame the
things which are strong, and God has chosen the lowborn things of the
world and the despised, the things that are not, that He might render
powerless the things that are, that no man should boast before God.”

There are three categories of human division in this passage:

The category of human wisdom to have or to have not.

The category of human power to have or have not.

The category of worldly environment to have or have not.

God chooses many from the lesser category in order demonstrate His
power.

He chooses the fools (here the frame of reference is human wisdom, so
uneducated would work well here) to shame the wise.

He chooses the weak to shame the powerful. This is weak according to
human standards. It may be poor with reference to money; it may that you
are the low man on the totem pole in your company; it may be that you
are not empowered politically. It may be that you are weak physically or
in the current subjective standards of beauty.

He chooses the lowborn and the despised, the “are nots” of this world to
render powerless the “ares”, that no man should boast before God.

You cannot bring your human intelligence, human power, or human birth
standing to the Great White Throne; you cannot bring these things to the
judgment seat of Christ.

This is why the praise of children glorifies God.

Implications of this point of doctrine concerning child rearing:

That there is no sin until God consciousness; therefore, there can be no
sin-related discipline until then.

There is still plenty of room for a learning routine within the limits
of the infant’s attention span.

Whatever negative emotions and expressions come from an infant are
related to his basic needs.

That the infant communicates these things instinctively, and that it is
the parents responsibility to understand and meet these needs are they
are communicated.

That without an active sin nature, there is no guile in the
communication of needs. They can always be accepted as they are.

That the sin nature activates when the child reaches God-consciousness,
and that this causes no small amount of consternation in a child; so an
authoritative yet loving approach to discipline is the best way to go,
especially early on.

The parents must form an alliance with the child against the sin nature.

That the child must be made to understand the forces within him, so that
he can begin to help himself.

The sooner the child can understand what impels him to be bad, the
sooner he can begin to stand against temptation on his own.

Gentleness and communication are the watchwords of correction in the
early days.

Two proverbs:

“Spare the rod and spoil the child”

“Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger; but bring them up in
the discipline and instruction of the Lord.” 3. That evangelization is
an absolute necessity at the moment of God consciousness.

As soon as you know that your child has reached God consciousness (and
it should be obvious), you have a heavy and personal responsibility to
evangelize your child.

You are never to scare your child or abuse your authority in any way to
accomplish this end. You are to present the issue clearly to him or her,
and to ask him if he would like to tell God that he believes in Christ.

Of course it is best to place the gospel within your child’s frame of
reference!

The evangelization of your child will ease your burden of child raising
one hundred fold.

The Accession of John the Baptist
---------------------------------

Introduction:

Note the distinction: to this point John has pointed the way to Christ,
and noted Christ’s superiority; here he completely accedes to Jesus,
more than hinting to his disciples to give way and follow Christ.

For a few weeks after Christ’s return from the wilderness, John has
continued to point the way to Christ. Since Christ returned, here is
what happened:

-   The priests and Levites came to John to inquire about Christ ( John
    1:1928).

-   John identified Christ as the Son of God (John 1:2934).

-   Christ called His first disciples (John 1:3551).

-   Christ performed His first miracle, at Cana, in Galilee (John
    2:111).

-   Christ stayed a few days at Capernaum with His family and His
    disciples (John 2:12).

-   Christ cleansed the temple at the Passover (John 2:1322).

-   The people in Jerusalem responded positively to Christ’s miracles at
    the Passover (John 2:2325).

-   Nicodemus came to Christ at night and inquired about His person
    (John 3:121).

This places the time at around late Spring to early Summer of 27 AD.
Christ is thirty years old.

Now Christ’s ministry has begun in earnest, and it is time for John to
completely step aside. Christ’s appearance in the region provides a
golden opportunity to do so.

By this time John has been on the scene for about a year and his
ministry has gained great fame and popularity. In fact his message
continued to have a following even decades after, and spread to far
distant places even after his death.

Imagine the humility of this man. To find such popularity, and then give
it all to Christ.

Discussion of John 3:22-36

**John 3:22**: “After these things Jesus and His disciples came into the
Judean land and there He spent time and baptized with them.”

So Christ moves from Jerusalem to the Judean countryside, apparently
somewhere near the river Jordan. The phrase meta tauta summarizes
everything that had happened in Jerusalem at that first Passover.

John uses the Roman term Judea, so this includes not only the old Judah,
but also a good deal of the old Northern kingdom, now called Samaria.
The location of this verse can be anywhere from halfway between Galilee
and the Dead Sea south along the Jordan River to the Dead Sea itself.
They may have been only a few miles from John and his disciples at the
time. At any rate, not more than forty miles, and probably much less
than that.

In the Greek, when there are two verbs and only one object in a
sentence, the object takes both verbs. That is the case with DIATRIBO
and BAPTIZO. They each describe different actions taken by Christ, but
they both take the same object, the disciples.

This object, the personal pronoun auton ‘them’, is modified by the
preposition META.

META defines the relationship of subject and object, and modifies the
action of the verb accordingly.

Christ did these actions in the company of the disciples; He ‘does’
these things with them. They do these things together, but since the
verb is in the third person singular, it portrays Christ as the
initiator of the action.

Christ ‘spent time’ with the disciples.

Since Christ produces the action of the verb, He is the initiator, while
the disciples are the co-participants.

DIATRIBO means to ‘wear away’ or ‘rub away’. It describes the wearing of
a path by foot traffic, or the wearing away of clothes from use. Since
the preposition DIA compounds this verb, the picture is of complete use
or wear. Not just worn, but worn through.

After a while, the Greeks applied the concept of this verb to time.
‘While away the hours’, ‘spend time’. It also applied to money ‘spend’,
and others things that get spent, like physical energy.

It even came to exemplify academic effort. Our English word ‘diatribe’
is the direct descendant of this concept. The noun form of this verb
could mean both ‘pastime’ and ‘study’. The adjective always meant
‘pedantic’ as in teaching in such a way that wears on the student.

John 2:12 describes Christ and others staying at Capernaum. John employs
the usual verb for such activity, meno.

John 3:22 is quite far enough away where the use of a synonym would not
be required. In this verse John wanted to describe exactly how Christ
spent the time with His disciples.

The time spent was a wearing time, a time of study.

Christ took this time to inculcate His disciples in the essentials of
His kingdom. He baptized with His disciples.

Now we have a puzzle. Christ initiated this action; the Pharisees
perceived that He was baptizing; but John makes it clear that it was not
Christ Himself that was doing the actual baptism. And there is little
doubt that this is baptism by water.

We know that Christ initiated this action because BAPTIZO is third
person singular, and Christ is the subject. His disciples did this with
Him, META AUTON.

We know the Pharisees’ impression from John 4:1, “Jesus knew that the
Pharisees heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than
John.”

We know that part of this impression was mistaken from John 4:2,
“Although Jesus Himself was not baptizing but His disciples were.”

The conclusion is that the baptizing was Christ’s idea, but the
disciples carried it out.

This idea bore fruit in two areas:

The introduction to Christ’s kingdom ministry continues. People are
baptized, and from it are identified with the millennial kingdom.
(doctrine of the Millennium, intercalation of the church age)

The disciples get a more intense form of training. Teaching always
requires a more thorough understanding of the subject matter.

You must anticipate what your pupils want to know, and distinguish what
they need to know. You must filter your subject matter accordingly, and
thus you think about it.

You must sort out what is true and false concerning the subject matter.

You must put the subject matter into a teachable form, and be able to
explain it in a manner that will satisfy the curiosity of your pupils.

You must fit the subject matter into the overall system, to give your
pupils the broader picture.

So by instructing the disciples on how to introduce others to the
kingdom, Christ better inculcates them into its precepts.

None the less, after this accession by John, water baptism never again
enters the scene in Christ’s ministry.

**John 3:23**, “Now also John was baptizing in Aenon near Salim, because
there was much water there, and they were appearing and being baptized.”

So in the time since Christ returned from the wilderness John has
continued his ministry, pointing the way to Christ.

Aenon near Salim was a little north of halfway between the Sea of
Galilee and the Dead Sea.

The phrase ‘John was also baptizing’ tells us that the baptism of
Christ’s disciples was water baptism.

An interesting verb is PARAGINOMAI ‘they were appearing’. It paints this
picture: one moment they are nowhere to be seen, and the next they
appear right at John’s side. It tells us that John’s ministry was going
like hotcakes.

**John 3:24**: “For John had not yet been thrown into prison.”

This event is not too far off, but we do not have the exact time. A
little over a year later John the Baptist is in jail, Luke 7:1117. It
does occur before Christ goes back to Galilee, according to Mark 1:14.
This return is apparently just a few days off.

John’s readers knew that the Baptist would go to prison and die there,
and this verse explains that those events are still in the future.

Just as John preceded our Lord in ministry, so also in imprisonment and
death.

Herod Antipas feared that John’s ministry would bring about an armed
revolt in Judea and Galilee. This, and John’s rebuke of Herod for
marrying his brother’s wife were the human viewpoint reasons. But
perhaps there is something more than meets the eye here… It is obvious
that it was God’s plan for John’s ministry to end.

**John 3:25**: “Then there arose an inquiry from the disciples of John
with a Jew about purification.”

So the disciples of John and a Jew got into an inquiry about
purification. The word for inquiry portrays two or more people
investigating a matter, all seeking the truth. It is literally, ‘a
seeking’, or ‘a quest’. It is interesting that these natural adversaries
have joined together on a topic that would pit them as adversaries
purifications. The preposition META reveals that these two have allied
on this matter.

Purification would be an interesting subject, but it does not seem to
line up well with their question, which is given in the next verse. What
they actually ask about is Christ. Let’s try to connect the two.

Purification fits well into the topic of baptism, for baptism could
easily be perceived as a ritual of purification.

John’s baptism was a baptism of repentance in preparation for the
Messiah and His kingdom. Just like the other rituals of the Jewish
system, it was a real act that taught Bible doctrine.

However, it was the Jewish trend to distort the teaching rituals into
legalism. It was their contention that just doing the rituals themselves
pleased God, regardless of what was in their hearts.

At some point the conversation must have shifted to a comparison of
Christ and John.

It must have been interesting indeed for John and his disciples when
Christ began to baptize.

Remember, John brought in this new ritual of baptism after the Jews had
been doing the same things for 1400 years.

Remember also that John was the first true prophet of Israel in a few
hundred years. He had a spectacular following because of his gift.

But John made it clear from the start that he was just showing the way
to Christ, and that his baptism was intended for that same purpose.

Now Christ, the superior has set His disciples to baptizing, and not too
far from where John’s ministry was located.

They are in a quandary: what change does this bring to John’s ministry?

**John 3:26**: “And they came to John and said to Him, ‘Rabbi, He who
was with you beyond the Jordan, about whom you yourself have testified,
behold, He is baptizing and all are coming to Him.’”

Hey, these guys are out of fellowship about losing their ministry to
Christ and His disciples.

Their concentration and focus is entirely on John, in the first part.
“He who was with you…” “About whom you have testified…”

But then they notice that this ministry is tapering off and they do not
like it. “He is baptizing [sneering tone], and all are coming to Him.”

This is the wrong focus! Wrong attitude!

But something else. Christ has now begun His own ministry. Why is John
still at work? Why has John not ceased now that Christ has begun?
Perhaps this is John’s one flaw. He did not know when to hang it up.

**John 3:27**: “John answered and said, ‘No man can receive a single
thing unless it has been given to him from heaven.’”

This is a hard line grace answer. The real man in question is Jesus
Christ.

It reveals the unasked question of the disciple-Jew alliance: Why Christ
and not John?

John tells them: All are going to Christ because it comes from heaven.

John uses two very strong grammatical constructions in order to make
clear the absolute nature of grace.

The first is OUDE HEN, which I have translated ‘a single thing’. OUDE is
nothing, and HEN is the numeral one. Together with the phrase ‘no man’,
they make a double negative, which is fine in the Greek, but confusing
in the English. In the Greek one negative strengthens the other. In the
English, one negative cancels the other. This construction is very
strong and makes an absolute statement. John is hammering on this
alliance.

The second is the perfect periphrastic participle of DIDOMI. This one
shows that heaven is the ultimate source of all things. You receive not
a single thing, unless it comes from heaven. It is one of the strongest
ways to state a principle of doctrine.

Additionally John makes clear the subjects to whom this rule applies:
mankind. He uses ANTHROPOS. Christ is a member of the human race, and so
this principle certainly applies to Him.

Therefore, what Christ has in the people who are flocking to Him comes
straight from heaven.

Remember, in verse 23, people were appearing out of nowhere to be
baptized by John. Now they are all going to Jesus, according to verse
26. Insert millennium comment: Christ is here to found the millennial
kingdom; John is in the way. Beware yourself in getting in the way of
the kingdom of Christ. You should be a window on the kingdom of heaven,
an open doorway.

**John 3:28**: “You yourselves witnessed me saying,”I myself am not the
Christ, but that I have been sent ahead of Him."

Again, John draws attention to Christ, and his relationship to Christ.
Here he reprises his role as the waypaver, even for some of his
disciples.

The emphasis here is interesting:

In claiming that he is not the Christ, John emphasizes himself with the
intensive use of the personal PRONOUN EGO.

In claiming that he has been sent, John uses the perfect periphrastic
construction. This again concentrates on John’s person.

John uses the preposition EMPROSTHEN to describe his relationship with
Christ. He sees himself as going ahead of Christ to prepare the way.

The conclusion is that John says the right things, but that he has
appearance of being self-centered. If John was doing the right thing at
this time, this would be a marvelous statement; but since he is not, we
may call it somewhat self-centered.

John has applied his mission in this way: he sees himself as the one who
must prepare the way for every individual in Israel. That before anyone
goes to Christ, they must go through him.

He sees a continuing role for himself in Christ’s kingdom. He is the
screener, the waypaver, the man who prepares the hearts of all for
Christ, even as Christ is on the scene.

But Christ, by setting His disciples to baptize, has communicated a very
hard message to John that with the beginning of the Kingdom ministry, he
is no longer needed.

Christ is there to be seen face to face; His ministry is in the open.
Why should Israel go through a human being to see Him?

**John 3:29**: “The who has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend
of the bridegroom, the one who stands and hears him rejoices with joy
through the sound of bridegroom’s voice. Therefore this joy of mine has
been made full.”

The bride at this point is Israel; the groom is Christ; the friend is
John.

The friend is what we would call the best man. In the Jewish wedding,
the friend would stand next to the bridegroom and hear his vows. At this
he would rejoice, as any best man would.

John says:

That he does not have the prize at this wedding of all weddings: Christ
does.

But that he still rejoices for Christ, and that the joy of hearing
Christ’s voice has been made full at this time.

Again, though, there is hint of bitterness. John perhaps has indulged in
self-pity here. Oh, he is not the bridegroom, and he does not get the
bride, but at least he vicariously experiences the bridegroom’s joy.
“Even though I do not get Christ’s joy, I am happy for him. My limited
joy has been made complete.”

Why the negative assessment of John’s statement? Because of his actions.
If John had ceased his ministry at the beginning of Christ’s ministry,
then these statements could have been taken in the most positive light
possible. Now because of John’s action, they have the appearance of
tarnish and rust. There is a dark side to them.

**John 3:30**, “It is necessary for that one to increase, but for me to
diminish.”

Note the two verbs that reflect the necessity.

The first is AUXANO, to grow. This verb described the growth of living
things, of plants and trees, of children. It shows a gradual growth over
a period of time.

The second is ELATTOO, to shrink. This too is a verb of gradual change.
It describes the action of shrinking over time, of growth in reverse.

What John has done here is nothing less than put a spin on the events of
the past few days. But let’s look again at the facts!

In verse 23, people are coming out of nowhere to be baptized by John.

In verse 26, they are all going to Christ.

This is not a gradual growth and diminishment! This is an all at once
radical change.

But why does John put his spin on these events? It can only be because
he wants to hold on to the following and the ministry that he thinks he
has.

John sees his accession as gradual; what has already happened was
immediate and absolute.

John uses a rather impersonal mode of reference to Jesus Christ. It is
the far demonstrative pronoun, ekeinon.

In fact, in this entire discourse, John uses the word Christ only once,
and never the word Jesus.

In verse 27, John says, “a man cannot receive a single thing”. The
application is Jesus.

In verse 28, John says, “I myself am not the Christ.” But the real focus
of the sentence is John, through his use of the intensive pronoun.

In verse 29, John employs a short parable, where Christ is the
bridegroom, but Christ is never mentioned by name.

In verse 30, John uses the far demonstrative.

Jesus was John’s own cousin. They were family, and yet John the Baptist
uses only titles and roundabout ways to describe our Lord.

John uses emphatic, intensive, and self-centered modes of expression to
describe himself.

Apparently, all the popularity and approbation had gone to John’s head.
He would lose that same head about a year later.

What follows now is an injection of John the Apostle’s. He inserts his
own discourse, and in a way it concentrates on what the Baptist has just
said. In opposition to John’s self-centered words, the Apostle
concentrates very much on the person and character of Christ.

**John 3:31**: “The one who comes from above is above all; the one who
is from the earth is from the earth and speaks of the earth. The one who
comes from heaven is above all.”

Now for John the Apostle’s editorial comment. He tells us in this verse
that what the Baptist has just said it cosmic propaganda, and entirely
wrong.

First is Christ. Christ comes from above, and is above all. He is above
the selfishness and pettiness of the Baptist. He is above all human
flaws.

Second is the Baptist. He is from the earth and he speaks the worldly
point of view. Make no mistake. John paints the Baptist here as he is:
worldly and trapped in the cosmic system. Spouting forth to his last few
followers the propaganda that he hopes will keep them.

Third is Christ again, and you can see immediately John the Apostle’s
desire to keep his gospel centered on Christ, and above all in its own
right. John needed to get out the truth on the last days of the
Baptist’s ministry, but did so in such a way that was objective and did
not linger on the sad details of the demise of this great prophet of
Israel.

Knowing what we now know now will make it easier to understand why in a
few more days John will be thrown into prison, and his enigmatic message
to Christ once there.

From here, the Apostle sticks to Christ.

**John 3:32**: “What He sees and hears this He testifies, and His
testimony no one receives.”

Now this is Christ. The nearest antecedent to the third person masculine
pronoun is the last sentence of verse 31, which is about Christ.

Nice. A description of the human faculties of sight and hearing,
attributed to the one from above. Now we have the hypostatic union.

This verse tells us that from Christ we get just the facts. That Christ
tells us like it truly is. It also describes the general response to
this ministry of truth.

No one receives the truth. It is the old aphorism, the truth hurts. The
truth often demands that we surrender our pride, and that is the most
painful thing. Only true humility will respond to the truth in the right
way. But truth is the kind of ministry that Christ has undertaken.

Christ testifies what He sees and hears. This also refers to His method
of faith perception. He only has available for application what He has
gained through faith perception. That very same thing is what we have.
This is a great testimony to kenosis.

**John 3:33**, “The one who receives His testimony sealed that God is
Truth.”

Positive believers receive another kind of sealing. This one they
produce by themselves. It is the sealing of the notion that God is
truth.

God is the very personification of the truth, and when someone believes
in Christ, they confirm that notion in their hearts.

The sealing is a confirmation that what has been said by Christ is true.

Verse 34 will explain this idea a bit more.

**John 3:34**, “For He whom God has sent speaks the words of God; for He
did not give the Spirit from measure.”

This jumps back to Christ in order to explain this new believer produced
sealing in the previous verse.

Christ speaks the words of God.

God gave the Spirit without measure to Christ, so that Christ could
speak God’s Words.

The term John uses for words is remata. This can mean the actual words
that come out of a person’s mouth, or it can mean the principles of a
person’s life. Here I think it covers both. Christ spoke the very words
of God (albeit in translation), and communicated the important
principles that come from Him.

This Christ did from the ministry of God the Holy Spirit, in perception
and application of the truth.

(faith perception of the truth)

**John 3:35**, “The Father loves the Son and has given Him all things
into His hand.”

This a direct reference to Daniel 7:1314.

**John 3:36**, “The one who believes unto the Son has eternal life; the
one who does not obey the Son will not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him.”

Again this has to do with imputations, and is a restatement of verse 17.

For the sake of clarity understand that obeying the Son means believing
in Him, and does not make reference to post salvation obedience.

This verse does not undermine eternal security.

The Samaritan Woman
-------------------

An Exposition of John 4:1-42

**John 4:1**, Therefore when the Lord knew that the Pharisees heard that
Jesus was making and baptizing a great many more disciples than John "

Christ finds out that the Pharisees are looking into things, and that
they are aware that He is making and baptizing many more disciples than
John.

The word PLEINOAS is “more” (disciples), but it describes a great many
more. Not just a one vote majority, but a landslide. The Pharisees now
would identify Christ as the threat here. They were quite worried about
two things.

First, that nobody was paying attention to them.

Second, that as a result they were losing their grip of power over the
people.

Christ knew it would be very much in their interest if he were
eliminated. He knew that they hated Him from the Temple incident, and
that though there were many coming to Him, their faith was still very
weak.

**John 4:2**: “Although Jesus Himself was not baptizing but His
disciples”

This is a parenthetical statement attached to verse 1. It explains that
Christ was not the one doing the baptizing in this operation, but His
disciples.

It clarifies the issue so that there is no confusion on the matter of
baptism.

**John 4:3,**He left Judea and departed again into Galilee."

The word “left” is translated from APHIEMI, which means “to quit,
cancel, forgive, or leave.”

Christ left the region because of the real threat of the Pharisees. His
destination is again Galilee, and He will have to travel through the
ancient region of Samaria to do so.

**Mark 1:14**: “And after John had been taken into custody, Jesus came
into Galilee, preaching the Gospel of God.”

**Mark 6:17**: “For Herod himself had sent and had John arrested and
bound in prison on account of Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip,
because he had married her.”

**Luke 3:19-20**: “But when Herod the tetrarch was reproved by him on
account of Herodias, his brother’s wife, and on account of all the
wicked things which Herod had done, he added this also to them all, that
he locked John up in prison.”

From Josephus… Herod feared open rebellion from John’s disciples.

The Lord moves in strange ways. Christ evaluates that the Pharisees are
a threat to Him and the kingdom ministry, and decides that it is wise to
move to Galilee and continue His ministry there. It is His aim to gain a
following and bring in the kingdom through positive volition.

John clings tenaciously to his perceived but nonexistent niche in the
kingdom ministry, and in the course of forth-telling manages to upset
Herod Antipas.

Herod fears open rebellion from the followers of John, and is upset
about John’s calling into question his morals in marrying his sister in
law. Herod has the Baptist arrested and placed in prison. John has been
taken off the scene, and is no longer an impediment to Christ’s kingdom
ministry.

But fortunately Christ is out of the way and safe up in Galilee. Through
intermediate means and wise behavior, Christ avoids disaster.

Note: the Pharisees had a tremendous amount of power in Judea, and only
less so in Galilee. Things are becoming hazardous for Christ already.

Now Christ heads through Samaria, and there He will settle the issue of
racial prejudice once and for all.

**John 4:4,**“And He had to pass through Samaria.”

Christ had to pass through Samaria because of the threat from Herod.
Herod’s headquarters was to the northeast of where Jesus and His
disciples had been. They could not go around Samaria, so they had to go
through.

Samaria was not the usual route from Judea to Galilee. Because of racial
prejudice, the more devout Jews found other ways to go. The Samaritans
had intermarried with the occupying Assyrian forces back in the eighth
and seventh centuries, B.C. Of course, many of those Assyrians were
believers in Jesus Christ, and true Jews, but no matter. The Samaritans
themselves had a king-sized inferiority complex, due to the Jewish
prejudice.

So it is providential that Christ go this route. There is a woman,
really, an entire town that is on positive signals toward God. Christ
had to go through Samaria because of Herod, and because of the woman and
the town of Sychar.

This providence is a kind of Divine guidance to watch out for. It
involves a change of your plans, and perhaps even suffering. But it
takes you to people who want God.

**John 4:5,6**, “So He came to a city of Samaria, called Sychar, near
the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph; and Jacob’s well
was there. Jesus therefore, being wearied from His journey, was sitting
thus by the well. It was about the sixth hour.”

Sychar is in central Samaria. It is in a hilly region, a region full of
Jewish history. Jacob stopped near here, and set up camp for the first
time in the promised land. It was here that his daughter was raped by
the men of Shechem (about a mile from Sychar), and where his sons killed
the Shechemites. When the Shechemites were dead, Jacob took their land
for his own.

Later, he willed this parcel of land to Joseph. Gen. 33:18ff; 48:22.
Joseph’s portion of this land was an extra one, due to his spiritual
maturity. There is a significance here. The people of this land were
Joseph’s people, long lost, now about to be redeemed. Christ here gives
a region and a people an opportunity which has not been theirs for 2,400
years.

The country is hilly, and so naturally Christ would want a drink. It is
late afternoon “the sixth hour”, and summer. The hiking was exhausting
work. Christ is sitting by the well, when along came the Samaritan
woman.

**John 4:7,8**, “There came a woman of Samaria to draw water. Jesus said
to her,”Give me a drink“, for His disciples had gone into the city to
buy food.”

Now there was another well on the other side of Sychar that was much
nearer the town. Why the woman came here is a part of Christ’s insight.

There is no one at this well but Christ, and at a time when there would
be much drawing of water.

In the summer, water would for the most part be drawn at sunrise and
sunset, for water carrying is much hard work. Furthermore, this well is
up on the side of a hill, making it that much more difficult. But Christ
sees this woman coming his way, and rightly perceives that she is a
social outcast. Women have a way of sticking together. This one is apart
from the other ladies. Now what would be the reason for that?

Christ must ask her for a drink because He is at the point of
exhaustion, and He has nothing to draw with. Here also is a reflection
of Christ’s true humanity: He really needed that drink.

John has His request in the imperative of entreaty, showing Christ’s
legitimate need for water. The imperative of entreaty is what a Greek
used when he really needed something badly, and quickly.

Our Lord was in a state of dehydration. Christ’s physical state
paralleled the woman’s spiritual state.

**John 4:9**, “The Samaritan woman therefore said to Him,”How is it that
You, being a Jew, ask me for a drink since I am a Samaritan woman?" (for
the Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.)"

This woman exhibits also bitterness. One, social outcast; two,
bitterness. You can see Christ tallying the score.

Here is a man weak from thirst who asks the woman to help Him, and puts
a tone of urgency on the matter; and she responds his request with a
remark that is bitter and sarcastic.

Her tone is like this: “Oh, so now, when you really need a drink you ask
for one, but not when your prejudice is in the way?” She criticizes
harshly, and has prejudice back toward the Jews. She assumes that Christ
is a racist because He is a Jew.

The woman knows Christ is a Jew maybe from his robe, which probably had
a Jewish fringe on it, but certainly from His Jewish accent. John’s
explanatory statement makes the Jewish prejudice clear. But we know this
from many other sources.

There is a little bit of sexist suspicion here as well. She makes an
issue out of her sex. The Jewish men did not exactly have a good record
on sexism either.

This is the third clue to Christ about this woman’s character: she is
suspicious of men, and makes an issue out of her sex. Social outcast.
Bitter. Sensitive about her sex. Hmmmm.

**John 4:10**, “Jesus answered and said to her,”If you knew the gift of
God and who it is who says to you “Give me a drink” you would have asked
Him, and He would have given to you living water.“”

Now comes the hook. I want you to notice first the innovation of our
Lord. In this instance He skillfully turns the conversation to the
gospel.

This part of the discourse has no small similarity to the conversation
with Nicodemus.

In both, Christ sets out the bait with a statement that would be obvious
to a believer, but an enigma to an unbeliever. Here He knows the
spiritual status of the woman. With Nicodemus, He did not.

In both, the hearers of Christ come back with an earthly interpretation
of His spiritual statement, thus identifying themselves as unbelievers.
In both, Christ then goes on to explain the gospel.

Christ has identified this woman as a social outcast who is bitter and
hypersensitive about her sex; now we see further that He knows she is an
unbeliever. Christ’s words form a complex conditional sentence. It is a
contrary to fact condition. He sets up a condition that is not true.

“If you knew the gift of God (but you do not) and who it is who says to
you”give me a drink" (but you do not), you would have asked Him (but you
did not), and He would have given to you living water (but I did not).

It is based on a premise that is obviously not true. She is not a
believer.

The gift of God must be His grace offer of salvation. It is the Greek
word DOREAN, which describes a gift of any kind. But this gift is
further described as being from God. The descriptive genitive case of
TOU THEOU makes it clear. Of course, Jesus is the Messiah, standing
right before her eyes. Yet she does not know Him.

But what is the living water?

From this verse alone we see that it is some form of sustenance that it
is a metaphor for real H2O. But we will delay our analysis until verses
thirteen and fourteen, where Christ gives a full description of this
very special water.

**John 4:11,12** “She says to Him,”Sir, you do not have the drawing
apparatus and the well is deep; therefore where do you have the living
water? You are not greater than our father Jacob, are you, who gave us
the well, and drank from it himself, and his sons and his cattle?"

The woman now speaks as one on the defensive. Being a social outcast,
she is likely to be an expert at repartee. Her fellow townsfolk probably
hurl insults at her every day, and she is used to giving as good as she
gets.

Now she is thinking: who is this guy? He makes noises like I should know
him, and he alludes to some gift of God, and living water.

So she sticks with what is tangible. She looks around her. How could he
have any water at all. She does not mention it, but this man has no
drinking skin. Neither does he have the apparatus with which to draw the
water. He cannot reach down into the well and get the water (it is
reported to be about 75 feet deep). Her conclusion from the tangible is
that he has no water on him, nor the ability to draw water here.

So then she goes to the intangible. The local legend is Jacob. Since it
has been some 2400 years since Jacob, his life and person may very well
have reached folkloric proportions in Sychar. She alludes to Jacob as if
he is capable of miracles, because she has ruled out the tangible. The
local legendary figure fits nicely here.

With her question, the woman implies that Christ is definitely not
greater than Jacob. It is quite likely that she believes no more in
Jacob than she would in Santa Claus. But she assumes the truth of
Jacob’s legend for the sake of putting down Christ.

But she does go on to establish the historical validity of Jacob’s
person. He gave us the well… drank from it himself, so did his sons, and
his cattle.

The cows she threw in. It stretches the imagination that Jacob watered
his herd from a well that was 75 feet deep. If you have ever seen how
much water a cow drinks, then you know that to water a herd from a well
is pure fiction! Perhaps Jacob lowered the cattle into the well, let
them drink, and then hauled them back up!

Our Lord may have had to bite His lip to keep from laughing at this
point.

So in summary:

She goes over the possible, and finds nothing. She goes over the
miraculous, and rejects Christ in favor of Jacob.

**John 4:13,14** “Jesus answered and said to her,”Everyone who drinks of
this water will thirst again; but whoever drinks of the water which I
myself will give to him will certainly not thirst for eternity, but the
water which I will give to him will become in him a well of water
springing up unto eternal life.“”

Now we have the full description of the living water metaphor. Let’s put
together all the aspects of it.

You must know the gift of God and the Messiah to ask for it.

It is something you ask for.

It is called “living water”. The participle zo.n reveals an eternally
existing state.

If you drink from it you will never thirst again, not for all eternity.

It is a well of water that springs up unto eternal life.

The process of elimination.

Is the water the Word of God?

The Word could accurately be called the “living” word.

But, you do have a need to stay in the word throughout your life. This
living water is more of a one shot deal.

Therefore, it is not the Word of God.

Is the water God the Holy Spirit?

Again, the Spirit could accurately be called “the living water”.

But fellowship with the Spirit can be sporadic, and is an option to the
believer. The portrayal of the living water leaves this in question. It
is a once for all proposition, and the ministry of the Spirit is
definitely not that.

Is the water the Gospel?

You must be positive to God consciousness to receive the Gospel
concerning His Son.

You must be positive to the Son of God, who is the living gospel, the
mediator between God and man.

You must ask for the gospel. That is, you must truly desire a
relationship with God through His Son.

Christ is certainly the living water.

You must drink the living water in order to enjoy its benefits you must
believe in the gospel.

If you drink from the gospel you will never need salvation again. It is
the free gift of God and lasts for all eternity.

The result of belief in the gospel is eternal life, for time and
eternity.

So yes, the water is the Gospel.

Some points of exegesis:

The adjective PAS plus the articular participle pino.n makes a universal
statement. “Everyone who drinks”

This universal statement is applied to the water from Jacob’s well.

The conclusion of the statement is DIPSE.SEI PALIN “will thirst again”
The verb reveals the need of the human body for water replenishment. The
declarative indicative mood makes this a dogmatic statement of reality
the need for water is definite. The adverb of repetition is PALIN
“again”.

The conjunction DE is adversative, showing that verse fourteen is going
contrast the statement in verse thirteen.

Another universal statement is made, this time with HOS AN PIE. This is
a potential subjunctive verb, showing that a function of volition will
take place here. That whatever God does depends on a free will decision
of God.

HOS AN is translated “whoever” this opens the field to all, and the
results are applied equally across the board.

The universal statement is applied to the living water, given by Jesus
Christ. Jesus Christ really did give us the living water, through His
death on the cross.

Then the kicker, a statement that is so strong that it cannot be
mistaken. OU ME DIPSE.SEI EIS TON AIO.NA “will absolutely not thirst for
eternity.” The idiom OU ME. is the most decisive way of negating
something in the future.

EIS TO.N AIO.NA is an idiom for eternity. This phrase makes it clear
that if you drink of the living water, you will never thirst again, in
time or eternity. This is a clear statement of eternal security.

The living water has a function it becomes in the believer a well of
water that springs up to eternal life. The metaphor is clear: you drink
the water, and it springs up inside of you, resulting in eternal life.

The drinking is again belief in the gospel, which is the living water.

The new well of water is the human spirit, which springs up resulting in
eternal life.

This is a nice double entendre here. The human spirit is the first
component of the resurrection body, and an irrefutable appeal to God for
a resurrection body in eternity.

But the human spirit is also a spiritual frame of reference for learning
Bible Truth in time. So it too springs up to eternal life.

The springing up is the verb hallomenou, from hallomai. It is truly a
word that belongs in the laboratory of Dr. Frankenstein. It describes
the twitching, leaping, quick movements of a living being. It is used in
a special way only to describe movement that proves the existence of
life. In Acts 3:8 it describes the leaping of the lame man who had been
healed. There, it proved the new life in his legs. Same for the healing
that took place in Acts 14. The human spirit is the very source of the
spiritual life. John chose this word carefully!

**John 4:15**“The woman said to Him,”Sir, give me this water, so that I
will not thirst, nor come through here to draw."

Our woman is not all the way there yet. Her eyes are still firmly locked
on terra firma.

She sees a way that she will not have to face the public again. If she
never has to drink water again, then she will never have to come all the
way out to Jacob’s well to drink, and never have to walk through town to
get here. Never have to walk under the disapproving glares of her
townspeople. Never have to be ashamed of her own sinful activities
again.

You must be careful with this woman’s form of address to Jesus Christ.
Kurie can be the equivalent of the English “Sir”. She does not yet
recognize Him as the Messiah.

So she goes from disrespect to respect. From disbelief to belief. From
desiring Him to solve her earthly problems to the next stage.

And now she is ready for that next stage.

**John 4:16**“He said to her,”Go call your husband and come back here."

This is the next hook. Now Christ does this from deductive reasoning,
and from the gift of God the Holy Spirit, as we will see.

So far, Christ knows that this woman is a social outcast, that she
loathes public appearances, that she is hypersensitive about her sex,
bitter, suspicious of men. Plenty to get us to this point. Christ could
very well work off a hunch at this point. But, He will also function
under the spiritual gift of prophecy.

Christ brings out this woman’s fatal distraction. The one thing that is
between her and belief in Christ.

**John 4:17,18**“The woman answered and said,”I have no husband." Jesus
said to her, “You have well said, ‘I have no husband’; for you have had
five husbands, and the one whom you now have is not your husband; this
you have said truly.”

The woman’s answer is firm and clear. She uses the negative particle OUK
to tell Jesus of her marital status. The statement covers the truth
however.

At the very least this is where Christ’s spiritual gift of prophecy
kicks in. He could deduce a lot from His own human genius, but not this.
This divinely inspired information came to Christ from His spiritual
gift of prophecy.

This woman is:

Immoral she is living with a man who is not her husband.

A failure at the marriage thing.

Disreputable, and the target of much public outcry.

She is not, however, a criminal she is not participating in adultery.

Adultery is a sexual relationship with someone other than your marriage
partner, or a sexual relationship with someone else’s marriage partner.
Or both. Just because the woman is living with a man does not make her a
criminal.

Not only would this woman have come under the Law of Israel for her
adultery, but also the more stringent law of Christ’s kingdom, Matt
5:2728. But He does not get after her for it, so she is not in that
state.

After Christ lays out the truth through the spiritual gift of prophecy
(and definitely not through His Deity), He goes on to say to the woman
that she has spoken truly. He uses the perfect tense of the verb to
speak to emphasize the clinical truth of her statement, but also to make
it clear that she understands that her statement was a white lie.

Give her credit for something: she stuck with the institution of
marriage for five times before she gave up. That is much more than in
our culture.

**John 4:19,20**“The woman said to Him,”Sir, I perceive that You are a
prophet. Our fathers worshiped on this mountain, and you people say that
in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship"

When the woman says that she perceives Christ is a prophet, it is a
little stronger than it comes out in the English translation. She uses
the word THEOREO, which means to be an eyewitness to a significant
event, and no kidding this event is quite significant.

But she says something controversial here, actually anything
controversial would do. The reason is that she tries to distract Christ
from her sordid personal life.

The issue which she brings up is one of the great controversies of the
day. When the Samaritans were cut off from the rest of the Jews they
decided to make their own temple, and worship there.

But it is just a smokescreen. Look, a flock of turtles!

**John 4:21 24**“Jesus said to her,”Woman, believe Me, an hour is coming
when neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall you worship the
Father. You worship that which you do not know; we worship that which we
know, for salvation is from the Jews. But an hour is coming, and now is,
when the true worshipers shall worship the Father in Spirit and truth;
for such people the Father seeks to be His worshipers. God is Spirit,
and those who worship Him must worship in spirit and truth."

The first statement of our Lord brings attention back on the true issue
for the woman. He does answer her question, but in doing so rivets the
conversation back to what the woman truly needs.

He makes it very clear that the place of worship does not matter, and in
fact will become a non-issue. By use of the word HORA Christ indicates
the nearness of that very time.

But the absence of worship in either Samaria or Jerusalem is not a
direct reference to the fifth cycle of discipline for Israel, but rather
the coming of the church age, and its grace assets.

The Shekinah glory, the indwelling presence of Jesus Christ between the
cherubs of the ark, was in the temple in Jerusalem. When the church age
would come, the Shekinah as a center of worship would cease. Therefore,
neither count.

The contrast between the Samaritans and the Jews serves to point out
God’s plan for the Jews and the exclusion of the Gentiles.

The statement, “salvation is from the Jews” communicates their historic
ambassadorship. God used the nation of Israel as His ambassadors before
all the nations of the world.

But note though salvation is from the Jews, it does not belong
exclusively to the Jews. The Gentiles may believe and thence become true
Jews.

True worshipers worship in Spirit and in truth. This refers to the
ministry of God the Holy Spirit during the church age. It does not
matter that the temple is here or there, but only one’s positive
volition to God.

The hour now is because the advent of Christ’s ministry concentrated
worship through Him as a visible witness to God. You could wherever
because of the second advent.

The final statement makes it an absolute. If you desire to worship God,
you must do so in Spirit and truth.

Christ speaks quite dogmatically here; He does so to establish His
spiritual authority before this woman.

So also must we, whenever we witness to unbelievers. Notice that Christ
satisfies the woman’s question, and takes advantage of the question to
establish His authority.

**John 4:25**“The woman said to Him,”I know that Messiah is coming (He
who is called Christ); when that One comes, He will declare all things
to us."

Perhaps the woman knows because of John the Baptist’s ministry. She
rejects Jesus’ authority, and deflects it to the Messiah. This is her
final effort to get away.

The issue is Christ, as the Messiah. The Son of God and King of kings.

Now finally the woman says that she places her trust in the Messiah, and
it is put up or shut up time.

**John 4:26** “Jesus said to her,”I who speak to you am He."

Jesus is the Messiah, and He answers her question.

Her response is interrupted by the arrival of the disciples from town.

**John 4:27**“And at this moment His disciples came, and they marveled
that He had been speaking with a woman; though no one said, ‘What do You
seek?’ or, ‘Why do You speak with her?’”

Second miracle of the day. The disciple did not blow it by opening their
big mouths. They at least had enough respect for Christ to do so.

On the one hand, the disciples marveled (Thaumazon) that Christ spoke to
this woman, because of her race, and because of her sex. They had the
prejudice that Christ did not.

The particle MENTOI is adversative. It introduces a concessive clause
and should be translated, “Though”.

The first possible question of the disciples would have been “What do
you seek?” This is the equivalent of “What do you want with her?” A rude
question, but typical of the prejudicial, sexist Jews.

The second question, “Why do you speak with her”, is more to the point.
They witnessed, as they drew near, His conversation with her. But they
did not hear the words, for John, among the disciples on that day,
indicates the possibility of these questions based on their marvel.

Notice the disciples are tempted to ask the same question as the woman,
but they do not. The woman had more bitterness to drive her.

**John 4:28,29**“Therefore the woman left her water pot and went forth
into the city and said to the men, ’Come, see the man who told me all
the terrible things I did, He is not the Christ, is He?”

She first leaves her water pot for Christ to drink; she has changed her
mind about His prejudice and thirst; she now sees Christ as devoid of
impure motive.

The record is incomplete as to when Christ got His drink. From what He
says in a moment to His disciples, count on it being unimportant.

The woman went forth into the city. She has lost her public shame. This
indicates that she has overcome her fatal distraction.

The woman said to the men. Now here is something interesting. Which men?
All the men of Sychar, or just her men her five and a half husbands. The
text just has it as generic men, plural. The definite article TOIS
assumes that the readers would know to what men John referred.

It would seem natural for her to go to her men first, for they were the
source of her fatal distraction before. All of her former husbands would
think her weird, or nasty in some way. That she goes to them makes
sense.

That she would just go to the men of the town does not make good sense.
Hypersensitive about her public image, she would want to absolve herself
before the women first. Also, this way does not fit because it would
reveal a prejudicial act on her part, and perhaps spite toward the woman
who had so maltreated her.

First, she uses the imperative of entreaty to urge the men to come and
see Christ. It is the same imperative of entreaty which Christ used to
indicate His need for water. She uses it here with DEUTE to reveal
another, greater necessity. That for the gospel.

She makes her case for their need by telling them about Christ’s
revelation of her personal failures.

Now, this woman lives in a small town, and has been a spectacular moral
failure. Her going to the victims of her failure, and saying these
things would cause quite a ruckus.

Although about everyone in town would know of her personal failures, an
outsider would not. Therefore, the supernatural aspect of it.

She uses the correlative pronoun HOSA to indicate the degree of her sin.
“Hey, that was pretty bad” is the indication. The correlative indexes
the degree of a thing, usually to show an extreme. That is definitely
the case here.

By the use of the aorist tense of POIEO, the woman keeps her sin in the
past. They are not the terrible things which she is doing. She does not
consider that she is even living with husband number five and a half.

Her last statement seems strange at first. The negative adverb ME in a
direct question expects a ‘no’ answer, and so under normal circumstances
her question would be, “He is not the Christ, is He?” This would of
course express doubt, and that would be uncharacteristic of someone who
has just become a believer and is in the process of telling all of her
former husbands about it.

Those of you with Greek Bibles will notice that it is not ME alone, but
the compound adverb METI. This throws a little more light on the
problem.

METI works to indicate the woman’s manners. It proposes an element of
doubt for her hearers, but not for her. So she is saying “come and see
Him, He miraculously knew all sins that you know, perhaps He is the
Messiah for you too.”

It is a difficult idiom, but note that the woman addresses the men, and
so she communicates what is not an issue for her, but for them. That
issue is whether Jesus is the Messiah.

The woman is doubtful, not about the identity of the Messiah, but
whether her five and a half husbands will accept that.

This is not a particularly effective way to witness. “I doubt whether
you will accept Jesus as Messiah, but I want to tell you about Him
anyway.”

But even in her weakness, God the Holy Spirit picked up the slack. It is
a fine thing to note. Your weakness is compensated by the Spirit’s
common grace ministry.

The strength of her words is in the evidence of her transformation. She
is no longer afraid of publicity how could this come about?

I would suggest that this woman expressed the gospel in such doubtful
terms because of the horrified look on the faces of her hearers.

**John 4:30** “They went out from the city and were coming to Him.”

The portrayal is interesting it confirms something we already know that
Christ is up on the hillside, and the well is in a difficult location to
reach by foot.

The aorist tense of the verb EXERCHOMAI makes it clear that they all
left the city at the same time. This reveals that the action all
occurred at one point in time. They left the city at the same time, but…

The imperfect tense of the verb ERCHOMAI shows them arriving over a
duration of time. They all got spread out due to the rigors of the
climb. Now, we are not talking about Mt. Everest here, but at least a
hill and enough distance where there is a stream of people coming to
Christ, even though they all started together.

**John 4:31-33**“Meanwhile the disciples were urging him, saying,”Rabbi,
eat." But he said, “I have food to eat of which you do not know” At this
the disciples said to one another, “Can someone have brought him food?”

The disciples are urging Christ to eat, because he must look pretty
rough. The verb EROTAO means to “ask”, or when the words are in the
imperative, “urge”. The note of urgency must come from the disciple’s
visual analysis of Christ’s condition.

Again, we are reminded that Christ has a human body, and no matter how
great his conditioning, it is susceptible to exhaustion. This has
probably occurred a couple of months after His ordeal in the wilderness,
and the extreme starvation of that experience may still have an effect
on him now.

Regardless, food is not the way to treat a heat injury or dehydration.
Food requires water for metabolization, and can hasten the demise of
someone in the severe stages of dehydration. Not only is their advice
spiritually incorrect, but it is medically incorrect as well.

Christ’s reply is on the spiritual level alone. But it sounds like he
may have his own stash. The statement of Christ in verse thirty two is
intentionally unclear, so as to stimulate curiosity in his disciples.

So the disciples talk among themselves, mystified that Christ has food.
But he still does not look well.

**John 4:34-38**“But Jesus said,”It is food for me that I might do the
will of him who sent me and that I might finish his work. Do you say,
“Four months more and then comes harvest”? But I say to you, look, lift
up your eyes and behold the fields that are already white for the
harvest. The reaper receives pay and gathers fruit for eternal life, so
that sower and reaper may rejoice together. That is how the saying comes
true: ‘One sows, and another reaps.’ I sent you to reap a crop for which
you have not toiled. Others toiled an you have come in for the harvest
of their toil."

Christ puts his spiritual responsibilities ahead of logistics. This is
the height of unselfishness.

He describes the realm of spiritual responsibility by using the term,
‘the will of him who sent me’

The time frame for the execution of this responsibility is until he has
finished God’s work. This is another way to say, ‘until I am dead’. Our
lives model Christ’s in this regard.

Christ employs two aorist subjunctive verbs, POIESO and TELEISO, to
communicate the contingent nature of His execution of God’s work.

It will depend on Him whether He accomplishes what God has prepared for
Him, Eph 2:10, “For we are God’s handiwork, created in Christ Jesus for
the good deeds which God has prepared beforehand.”

This works much like unlimited atonement and salvation. God prepared the
salvation, we must accept.

Christ then points out that it is a relatively long time to the harvest
apparently four months to the grain harvest (that would, incidentally,
place this incident in June).

And there below them, spread out in a panorama, comes the town of Sychar
streaming to Jacob’s well, and to once again seek the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. The woman who was hardly noticed by the disciples has
opened her mouth in a weak and human way; and that plus the common grace
ministry of God the Holy Spirit is more than enough to impel the people.

As they come, Christ has more instructions for His disciples in the
matter of ambassadorship.

The pay of the reaper is logistical grace. It is there to keep him alive
so that he can gather the fruit of the harvest.

The harvest itself is the ambassadorial responsibility of every
believer. This responsibility must come second to spiritual growth, but
it is necessary nonetheless.

The harvest is for eternal life because those whom you harvest now have
that life. They now wait along with us for the final harvest of the
Great White Throne, where all of our names will be found in the book of
life.

The purpose is so that the reaper and the sower may rejoice together.

Sowing the seed is tantamount to giving the gospel. Christ sowed the
seed and reaped the harvest with the woman.

The woman has now sown seed among the people of her town, and they come
to the harvest of their own accord.

Funny thing, but the reapers are the disciples, and the sower is the
Samaritan woman. Christ is getting the disciples ready for a big shock:
they are going to rejoice with one whom they would normally consider
racially and sexually inferior.

The disciples have not toiled for this crop, but they will reap. The
woman has toiled, and she will have the pleasure of watching the
harvest.

**John 4:39-42**“Many Samaritans of that town came to believe in him
because of the woman’s testimony: ‘He told me everything I which did.’
So when these Samaritans had come to him they asked him to stay with
them; and he stayed there two days. Many more became believers because
of his word. They told the woman, ’It is no longer because of what you
said that we believe, for we have heard him ourselves; and we know that
this is in truth the Savior of the world.”

A genuine revival welled up in Sychar on account of this woman who
believed and was willing to give the gospel, no matter how weak the
presentation.

Her testimony was simple: “EIPEN MOI PANTA HA EPOIESA” He told me
everything which I did.

Again, this testimony is powerful, because everyone in this little town
knew of this woman’s affairs.

This woman may be someone that we know by name from other gospel
accounts, but her identity is closely guarded by John, because her past
life is really not an issue.

John makes this abundantly clear when he goes on to say that her
testimony faded into oblivion when Christ began to speak. Therefore,
this harvest divides into two: those harvested by the words of the
woman, and those harvested by the words of Christ.

Who witnessed to whom is not an issue. But for John, this woman’s
privacy is. What does it matter how spectacularly you have failed in
your life before God? What does it matter if you were the very pinnacle
of average? None. You are a new creature in Christ.

It is with respect that the townspeople make their comment. They admit
the validity of the woman’s judgment when they concentrate on the words
of Christ. Let us not forget that this woman’s witness was particularly
weak, while the words of Christ were no doubt quite dynamic. And this
does not matter either, for the common grace ministry of the Spirit
covered both.

Notice their salvation orientation: Christ is the savior of the world.

Christ is the savior not just of the Jews, but of the Samaritans, and
the entire world.

Is it not significant that the first real harvest of Jesus Christ is of
Gentiles? And now these Gentiles are true Jews.

Jesus’ Galilean Ministry
------------------------

**Arrival in Galilee, John 4:43-45.**

“And after the two days He went forth from there into Galilee. For Jesus
Himself testified that a prophet has no honor in his own country. But
when He came to Galilee, the Galileans received Him, having seen all the
things that He did in Jerusalem at the feast; for they themselves also
went to the feast.”

Christ is headed to Cana, a day or two’s journey from Sychar. Galilee
was His original destination.

Let’s get this right: Christ went to Galilee, but He knew beforehand
that a prophet has no honor in his own country.

He is not stupid or naive. He does have a sense of duty concerning the
gospel, and willingly goes where He is quite sure of a negative
response.

Christ’s exact words were PROPHETES EN TE IDIA PATRIDI TIMEN OUK ECHEI -
“A prophet has no honor in his own fatherland.”

Christ uses PATRIDI for ‘country’. It is a word that describes the land
of one’s forebears. Galilee was the land of Christ’s fathers - it was
where He grew up.

The word for honor is TIMEN, and here it describes something close to
our idea of respect.

There are valid reason for this, which we will address fully when Christ
goes before the synagogue in Nazareth. For now the simple: they watched
Him grow up, and even though Christ was a perfect child it was difficult
for them to perceive that He was the messiah all along. They are so
arrogant, they think they would have noticed or something.

John concludes by noting that the Galileans actually did receive Christ.
He uses the particle OUN in an adversative sense. This John also does in
9:18 of his gospel.

Christ was not wrong, here. Though the Galileans saw what Christ had
done at the feast (many miracles), that is not the equivalent of
following Him.

An interest in the spectacles of healing and miracles does not indicate
a desire to accept Christ and His kingdom.

Miracles and healings are easy things to like. The kingdom requires
sacrifice of self, and so is quite difficult to accept.

The reason for the Galilean acceptance is clear: the miracles at the
Passover feast. There is therefore an exception to the rule. This
incident serves to point out that you must never assume negative
volition about any group - not Samaritans, and not even the people of
your home town or nation.

Note also that Christ was not wrong in making His generalization. Christ
did make that testimony, but He still went, trusting the Lord that
people are truly free to make their own decisions about Him.

**The Nature of the Galilean Ministry**

**Matthew 4:17**: “From that time Jesus began to preach and say,
‘Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.’”

**Mark 1:14b-15**: “preaching the gospel of God, and saying,”The time is
fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent and believe in the
gospel."

**Luke 4:14b-15**: “and news about Him spread through all the
surrounding district. And He Himself taught in their synagogues, being
praised by all.”

This synoptic passage divides into three parts: the message, the time,
and the method.

The message is one of repentance and belief in the gospel. Again, the
concept of repentance. It means to change your mind, and does not refer
to how you feel about a thing.

The time is the fullness of time - just the right time according to
God’s sense of order for Christ to appear on the scene and begin His
kingdom ministry.

This is the true beginning of the kingdom ministry. Whereas before
Christ baptized, or witnessed to the people of Samaria, now He offers
His kingdom.

The method of Christ was to go to the synagogues in the region, and
teach there. There He would have a gathering of at least religious
people, if not a few who were faithfully waiting for the Him. Christ’s
ministry was naturally characterized by sound strategy.

An interesting thing at the end of Luke’s statement: He was praised by
all.

In Luke 4:14b and 15, the present participle DOXAZOMENOS shows
simultaneous action with the main verb.

The main verb is the aorist verb EDIDASKEN, which summarizes the action
of teaching in Galilee. It is in the past. So while Christ was teaching,
all the people He taught praised Him.

This is more than just a fascination with miracles. God designed the
miracles to validate Christ’s teaching. All the people who saw Him in
the synagogues responded positively to the message as well as the
miracles.

Again, Christ’s trust in free will is well justified. There is genuine
positive volition in this region.

One more thing: at some time along in here, Christ must have released
His disciples to return to their homes and jobs, for only a little while
later He is going to place them on recall.

**Christ Heals the Official’s Child - John 4:46-54**

**John 4:46,47** “He came therefore again to Cana of Galilee where He
had made the water wine. And there was a certain royal official, whose
son was sick at Capernaum. When he heard that Jesus had come out of
Judea into Galilee, he went to Him, and was requesting Him to come down
and heal his son; for he was about to die.”

This was apparently a part of Christ’s course of travel from synagogue
to synagogue. There was one in Cana, so he came there. It would be
natural for Christ to come to Cana, because of His former miracle there.
That miracle would be the perfect groundwork for a few days of ministry.

The royal official was a BASILIKOS. Since his son is in Capernaum, he
must be from there. He is not from Cana, because he comes to Cana;
presumably from Capernaum.

BASILIKOS was a somewhat generic term, which encompassed both members of
the royal family, and those who were officials in the king’s household.
We can only speculate here. There is some significance here, even though
the exact identity of this man remains hidden. Social status means
nothing in the kingdom of God. You may be from the highest or lowest
social class, but it does not matter to God. His grace offer extends to
all.

This event is especially pertinent coming right after the narrative of
the redemption of a complete social outcast, the Samaritan woman. So in
just a few verses we go from the lowest class to one of the highest, and
both are redeemed by the grace of God. If grace is extended to all, then
there is no excuse for anyone. Race, social class, sex, etc.

This royal man is at the point of desperation - his son is sick, and
really about to die.

The verb ESTHENEI describes the boy’s illness. It describes the spectrum
of bodily ailments, from weakness or minor illness to a fatal disease.

The phrase EMELLEN APOTHNESKEIN makes the grave nature of his condition
quite lucid. It is literally, ‘about to die’.

The boy is in Capernaum, the city of Nahum, while his royal father is in
Cana with Christ.

The father has come to Cana because he had heard that Christ had come up
from Judea. At the very least, this man knew of Christ. He may have even
seen Christ at the feast in Jerusalem. But he knows Christ, and believes
that He can heal his son.

The man goes to Christ. His son may be so ill that he cannot be moved.
Such is likely.

He asks politely for Christ to come down to Capernaum (Cana was in the
hills and Capernaum at the seaside). He certainly does have respect. It
is unclear as yet whether this royal man believes in Christ.

**John 4:48**, “Jesus therefore said to him,”Unless you all see signs
and wonders, you absolutely will not believe."

This is a statement about the general mental attitude in Galilee at this
time. Although Christ addresses the man (HOUTOS), the statement is
plural (IDETE), and thus impersonal.

SEMEIA is the word for signs. It is something miraculous done for a
specific purpose. At this time to point the way to the Messiah.

TERATA is the word for wonders. But there is a terrifying side to this.
At the least it is something so powerful that it would cause the witness
to be stricken with awe. Terror is not out of the picture. Perhaps a
good example is the baptism of Christ, where the heavens tore open, and
the voice of God came out of the sky, and the Spirit descended in bodily
form like a dove. Another example has yet to happen in our narrative -
it is the transfiguration of Christ. An awesome display of power is a
good way to describe this.

EAN ME is the Greek idiom for ‘unless’. An equally good way to translate
is “If you all do not see signs and wonders.”

IDETE is the simple verb for seeing, in the aorist subjunctive. So, the
people of Galilee must see signs and wonders in order for the event to
come to pass.

This is the strongest possible negative in the Greek language. It is the
watertight, absolute negative, OU ME.

The verb is the aorist subjunctive PISTEUSETE. It reveals something
about belief. The aorist shows that belief in Christ occurs in one
moment of time.

The fulfillment is negative, the second half of a double negative. Turn
this around, and it is “You all must absolutely see signs and wonders
before you will believe.”

It is not that the Galileans refuse to believe, but that they will not
believe unless Christ proves it to them by the use of signs and wonders.

What would these people have done in the post-canon church age?

Notice that this is not a personal slam of this man. He is different
from the class that Christ outlines because he is not there to believe
in Christ, but to preserve the life of his son.

It is apparent that the man believes in the supernatural powers of
Christ, and that he has followed somewhat the career of the Messiah.

**John 4:49** “The royal man said to Him,”Sir, come down before my child
dies."

The royal man addresses Christ respectfully, saying, KURIE. As we saw
with the Samaritan woman, this title does necessarily mean belief in
Christ.

The man assumes that Christ must be face to face with his son in order
to perform the miracle; this is a mistaken assumption.

The aorist imperative of KATABAINO shows the man’s sense of urgency.
Again it is the imperative of entreaty. No man has the right to command
the Messiah as though God were under the authority of man. The
imperative of entreaty commands out of necessity.

The son of this man is young - just a PAIDION. This indicates that the
boy is physically just a boy.

The royal man depicts the time crunch with the phrase PRIN APOTHANEIN TO
PAIDION MOU.

PRIN is the adverb of time ‘before’. It is before an undetermined time,
which is the time of the death of his son.

The verb is APOTHANEIN, the aorist infinitive of the verb ‘to die’. The
aorist tense concentrates on the exact time of death. The royal man
assumes that if Christ can get there at any time before death it will be
in time, and the boy will be saved.

Again, there is an implied belief in the healing power of Christ.
Whether this belief extends to Christ’s future work on the cross is
still to be seen.

**John 4:50**, “Jesus said to him,”Go; your son lives." The man believed
the word that Jesus spoke to him, and he started off."

Christ decided to heal this man on the basis of the man’s belief in His
power to heal. That was enough for the healing to take place. It is
clear that there is perfect confidence on the part of Christ in the
matter. He says, POREUOU, HO HUIOS SOU ZE.

The present imperative of POREUOMAI is the command of Christ. It is
simply, ‘Go’. The presumption is that the man is to return to Capernaum
and the side of his son.

The present active indicative of ZAO is a simple statement of fact. The
present tense reveals durative action. The man’s son continues to live.
The declarative indicative mood makes a dogmatic statement of reality
about the son’s life. He truly continues to live.

The man’s response is belief in the word of Christ, but still not in
Christ for eternal salvation. The man’s action in returning to Capernaum
without Christ reveals his steadfast belief in Christ’s ability to heal.
There is no question in his mind that he will find his son well.

**John 4:51-53**, “And as he was now going down, his slaves met him,
saying that his son was living. So he inquired of them the hour when he
began to get better. They said therefore to him,”Yesterday at the
seventh hour the fever left him." So the father knew that it was at that
hour in which Jesus said to him, “Your son lives”; and he himself
believed, and his whole household."

The slaves of this man left the side of the boy, because he could
obviously be safely left. There were probably nurses in attendance. They
were on their way to Cana, when they met one another. Their message was
of course one of joy. The son was living, and clearly out of danger for
his life.

The very hour at which the son began to get better was the very hour
that Christ spoke the words to the royal man. There was no coincidence
here. The words of Christ healed the son.

The result is that this man and his household finally put their whole
belief into the Messiah, and His future redemptive work.

The important principle from this story is that faith in miracles and
healing does not mean faith in Christ unto salvation. It is an important
theme in the context.

**John 4:54**, “This is again a second sign that Jesus performed, after
coming out of Judea into Galilee.”

The aorist participle ELTHON indicates that the signs were performed
after coming out of Judea, but, and this is tricky, before He is
completely into Galilee. The aorist participle shows action that occurs
before that of the main verb. So the ‘coming out’ occurred before this,
while the implied arrival was technically not complete. Compare this
verse with John 4:43 to see it in the right light.

The first sign was the revelation of the Samaritan woman’s personal
life. The second the healing of the royal man’s son.

Ministry and Rejection at Nazareth
----------------------------------

**Luke 4:16**, “And He came to Nazareth, where He had been brought up;
and as was His custom, he entered the synagogue on the Sabbath, and
stood up to read.”

This verse reveals again the strategy of Christ in going to the
synagogues - but it also refers to a custom of His from youth, and the
foundation of His strategy.

The participle TETHRAMMENOS vividly portrays the bringing up of Christ.

The basis meaning of TREPHO has to do with the care of animals. It
really indicates just feeding and watering them. In fact, it is probable
that our English word trough comes from this very verb.

This participle is in the perfect periphrastic construction, which is
the most intense and vivid way to portray action with the Greek
language.

The passive voice shows that Christ did not grow up by himself, but that
He had been brought up by His parents.

Going into the synagogue on the Sabbath was the EIOTHOS of Christ. This
word comes from ETHOS, which means custom, or even law. From this same
word we draw the English ‘Ethics’. Not only was this a custom, but it
was a rigid habit.

From the context itself, it appears that this was His habit from youth.
That He would go into the synagogue on the Sabbath and read.

The synagogue was a place for local gatherings of Jews, outside of
Jerusalem.

Here, the local rabbi would read Scripture and instruct upon it. This
usually occurred on the Sabbath, and during the feasts.

Here, the local children and young men would receive religious
instruction.

The interior of the synagogue had seating arrangements, and, a platform.
This platform was called the BEMA. It was situated either in the center
of the room, or at one end. On the BEMA was an ark, which carried the
scrolls of Scripture.

Often the synagogues that were far from Jerusalem would also add the
entire ritual system, so that their members could understand the truth.

Since this was Christ, and it was His hometown, it is likely that on
this day the synagogue would have been especially full.

**John 4:17-20**, “And the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was handed to
Him. And He opened the book, and found the place where it was
written,”The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because He anointed Me to
preach the gospel to the poor. He has sent Me to proclaim release to the
captives, and recovery of sight to the blind, to set free those who are
downtrodden, to proclaim the favorable year of the Lord." And He closed
the book, and gave it back to the attendant, and sat down; and the eyes
of all in the synagogue were fixed upon Him."

The quoted passage is Isaiah 61:1-2. But, Christ paraphrases part of it,
leaves some of it out, and adds a little something on His own
initiative.

Here is the quote from the NASB: “The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me,
because the Lord has anointed me to bring good news to the afflicted; He
has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to
captives, and freedom to prisoners; to proclaim the favorable year of
the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all who
mourn.”

Christ substitutes gospel for good news, a paraphrase.

He substitutes ‘poor’ for ‘afflicted’, but this distinction can be
blurred by translation.

Then Christ sets up parallel statements:

-   Release to the captives;

-   Recovery of sight to the blind;

-   Set free those who are downtrodden;

-   Proclaim the favorable year of the Lord.

Isaiah’s parallel of these things is:

-   Bind up the brokenhearted;

-   Proclaim liberty to the captives;

-   Freedom to the prisoners;

-   Proclaim the favorable year of the Lord.

But note - Christ’s addition comes from another place in

**Isaiah 6:9,10**, “Go, and tell this people:”Keep on listening, but do
not perceive; keep on looking, but do not understand. Render the hearts
of this people insensitive, their ears dull, and their eyes dim, lest
they see with their eyes, hear with their ears understand with their
hearts, and return and be healed."

As for leaving out certain things, well that is perfectly alright. He
had a specific reason for doing so.

Another reason for their rapt attention was that the Isaiah 61 passage
is messianic. It speaks of the anointed one of the Lord, who is the
Messiah. Here the man who is reputedly the Messiah, and He chooses to
read a Messianic passage. And this passage, when read, is in the first
person… “The Spirit of the Lord is upon ME… The Lord has anointed ME… He
has sent ME…”

The favorable year of the Lord is the year of Jubilee. And Christ is
saying here that the Jubilee is upon them.

A loud trumpet would proclaim liberty throughout Israel on the tenth day
of the seventh month (the day of atonement), after a lapse of seven
Sabbaths of years. So every fiftieth year was a jubilee year.

On this year, the following things would occur - Lev 25:8-17.

-   It was considered a normal sabbatical year, so the land would lie
    fallow for the second consecutive year. cf. Lev 25:2-7.

-   The trumpet would sound on the day of atonement.

-   They specifically remembered their time of slavery in Egypt, and
    their release from captivity.

-   All of the slaves in the land were released, although this was often
    applied only to those of Abrahamic descent (Leviticus does not say
    that).

-   All of the real property reverted to its hereditary owners. This
    signified that God was the owner of Israel’s land - v.23.

Interestingly enough, this struck a course that was anti socialist, but
not truly capitalist. It was anti-monopolistic.

It definitely reaffirmed the right to own property, and rejected the
redistribution of wealth based on need.

However, reversion to hereditary landholdings every fifty years assured
that there would be no long-lasting monopolies.

Property values were adjusted according to how many years it was to
Jubilee.

The Jubilee was not practiced or mentioned after the Babylonian exile.
This is the third reason why Christ had their rapt attention. Surely
such a proclamation would surely take their breath away.

From the aorist passive verb EPEDOTHE, we understand that someone handed
to Christ the scroll of Isaiah. In other words, Christ did not get to
choose the scroll of reading. Whoever it was may have known the
Messianic character of this book, for it is full of Messianic
prophecies. From verse 20, it is understood that the synagogue attendant
was the one who handed Christ the scroll.

The verb ATENIZO describes the riveted eyes of the congregation. The
verb means to stretch muscles or ligaments, and came to denote a staring
countenance, almost with the eyes bulging out of the head.

**John 4:21,22**, “And He began to say to them,”Today this Scripture has
been fulfilled in your hearing." But all were speaking well of him, and
wondering at the gracious words which were falling from His lips; and
they were saying, “Is this not Joseph’s son?”

Now Christ began to tell them something about this reading, in other
words, what was important about it. The aorist tense of ARCHOMAI
concentrates on the very moment of the beginning, and so these words
barely got out of Christ’s mouth, and he may not have finished the
complete sentence reproduced here.

What he was about to say, and was interrupted during, was that He
Himself was the anointed one, the preacher, the atoning sacrifice that
gave freedom. But…

But Christ is interrupted by an uproar of voices in the synagogue - and
they are all talking of Christ. Now, the KAI at the beginning of verse
twenty two is adversative, and should be translated “but”.

This conversation goes on simultaneously with Christ speaking. Does this
bother you? It bothers me.

The imperfect tense of MARTUROO makes it clear that this was an ongoing
roar of voices.

The verb THAUMAZO is also in the imperfect. They are all - PANTES - all
testifying out loud, and marveling in their souls.

But there is a right time for everything, and this is not the right time
for talking and marveling.

They testified and marveled at the gracious words which went forth from
His lips. But this observation is about the scroll reading, and not
Christ’s sermon which was to follow, for we know from the Greek that
they interrupted Him before He could really talk.

The verb EKPOREUOMAI describes the words going forth from the lips of
our Lord. And, it concentrates on their enunciation. What they were
saying was this: “When He reads that scroll He is so eloquent.” But
nowhere in this description is there a description of the words getting
into their hearts and lives.

The crowd also notes that Christ is the home town boy made good. “Is
this not Joseph’s son?” is a question that expects a positive answer.
They are marveling at this kid who is now a man, and whom they know.

It is a weird and ironic scene - a crowd bubbling with conversation over
the eloquence of their home town boy, when at the same time this man,
no, the Messiah is beginning to speak more words.

As we will see, Christ immediately identifies their character, and their
terrible flaw. Instead of talking about Christ, they should have been
listening to Christ.

**John 4:23,24**, “And He said to them,”No doubt you will quote this
parable to Me, “Physician, heal yourself!” We heard certain things were
happening at Capernaum, do them here in your fatherland as well." And He
said, “Truly I say to you, no prophet is welcome in his home town.”

Now Christ replies, and He begins with the adverb PANTOS, “by all means”
or “certainly”. Christ is positive as to the character of His audience.
The spirit of this is sanctified cynicism… “Next you are going to do
this.” PANTOS means that Christ is rolling his eyes at his audience.

The proverb or parable is one that even exists today in many forms.

Here is a simple enigma: There are two barbers in a one horse town… to
whom do you go for the best haircut? The one with the worst haircut, for
they must cut each other’s hair.

It is often the fatal flaw of the physician that he cannot heal himself.

But Christ places these words in the mouths of His audience, that He
should heal those people in His hometown, the same as what He did in
Capernaum.

But Christ will not do it. He is not going to give them the
satisfaction, because he knows that they have only a prurient interest
in His miracles and healings.

Christ knows the character of His audience from their disrespectful
bantering just when He was beginning to preach.

The way Christ quotes the fruit of their character is less than
flattering. He sees them as narrow eyed people yearning for the
satisfaction of their stimulation lust. The correlative pronoun HOSA
gathers the healing at Capernaum to their desire to see the same in
Nazareth.

But also the aorist imperative of POIEO means something. These people,
Christ knows, are into the demand syndrome. “Do for us what you did in
Capernaum” is the gist.

Now Christ has a message or moral based on His analysis of their
character, and it is this: “No prophet is welcome in His hometown.”

And it is true here, for this audience has been so rude to Christ that
He could not even get His message out.

Christ was less than welcome, for while His audience was full of praise
for how He read the scroll, they were less than interested in what He
had to say about it.

In fact, if their true desire was to see a healing or a miracle, then
these words of theirs are nothing more than flattery. They no doubt
interrupted His message so that He would get on with the healing.

So, the people of Nazareth had no interest in God or the truth, but
instead went to that synagogue only to satisfy their stimulation lust.

Now, some principles.

-   The church is not about stimulation lust, but teaching, and
    inculcation in doctrine.

-   Stimulation lust is a sign of the cosmic system. It reveals a
    bitterness toward God, a deep seated rejection of the truth,
    spiritual blindness, and a frantic search for happiness.

-   As long as your soul is dominated by any form of lust, you cannot
    please God. You may attempt, in your state of deception, to flatter
    God into giving Him what you want, but you will not receive it

-   First, you must repent, and leave behind your love for the cosmic
    system, and turn to God, and His grace plan.

-   Then He will guide your life, into a life of balance, and give you
    what He thinks you will like. What God thinks you will like is best
    for you.

**John 4:25,26**, “But I say to you in truth, there were many widows in
Israel in the days of Elijah, when the sky was shut up for three years
and six months, when a great famine came over all the land; and yet
Elijah was sent to none of them, but only to Zarephath, in the land of
Sidon, to a woman who was a widow.”

This narrative goes back to 1 Kings 17 and 18…

In chapter seventeen, God gives Elijah power over the rain clouds of the
sky. They will rain only by the word of Elijah. Ahab is king, and he is
an evil, idol-worshipping hypocrite.

So, the drought is discipline, brought on by the Lord, who delegated the
power of drought to Elijah.

Now something interesting… God commands Elijah to live outside of the
land during this time. First, He is assigned to the brook Cherith. This
is one of the tributary streams that run from the Jordanian highlands in
the East down to the Jordan River to the West. It is difficult to know
exactly which one, but know this: it was in a wild and remote part of
the country, near the same wilderness where Christ received His evidence
testing.

The brook Cherith dried up, the Lord told Elijah to go to Zarephath, in
Sidon. This is also outside the boundaries of the land.

Zarephath was an old, old city on the Mediterranean seacoast. It had
been around more than seven hundred years at the time when Elijah came.

Although there was no positive volition at all in the land - and listen
to this - no positive volition in the land, there was one woman there
who wanted to hear the gospel.

Lesson: during the dispensation of Israel the gospel was still quite
available to the Gentiles. The woman in Zarephath was a Gentile, and
positive to the teaching of the Word.

The widow and her son were exceedingly poor, and when Elijah met her,
she was gathering sticks or twigs so that they could have a meal.

But God worked a miracle through Elijah. When Elijah arrived at the
widow’s place, there was a little bit of flour in her bowl, and a little
oil in her jar. But that never ran out as long as the drought continued.

Then also, the widow’s son became sick, and almost to death, but Elijah
healed him through the Lord’s power.

The result of these two miracles was that the woman believed in Christ:
“Now I know that you are a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in
your mouth is truth.” The miracles were validation for Elijah’s God.

But meanwhile, back in the promised land, God has done no more miracles,
and the drought marched on.

That time is brought forward by Christ, and applied not to the nation,
nor to the region, but just to His home town. There will be no miracles
here, because the people are full of unbelief.

This statement would have really chapped a crowd like this. Not only
because they could care less about God’s word, but also because their
stimulation lust had gone unappeased.

Just a mention of it here: when one category of lust is thwarted, then
the truly unhappy will often shift their trend to another. It would
happen here.

So Christ goes from being on the verge of announcing His Messiahship to
telling these people that they will not get their Messiah. Hard stuff.

This is also a precursor to the age of the Gentiles. For the gospel went
to the Jews in the land first. But when the Jews reject the Gospel, the
primary focus of evangelism turns to the Gentiles.

**John 4:27**, “And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of
Elisha the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, but only Naaman the
Syrian.”

This one originates in 2 Kings 5:1-14. It has very much the same theme
as the first illustration.

The description of Naaman, the gentile Assyrian, is in the very first
verse, “Now Naaman, captain of the army of the king of Aram, was a great
man before his master, and highly respected, because by him the Lord had
given victory to Aram. The man was also a valiant warrior, but he was a
leper.”

A little servant girl, who attended Naaman’s wife, suggested that Naaman
go to Elisha, in Samaria to be healed. This little girl was a Jew.

So Naaman went to Israel, to the city of Samaria, and pleaded with the
king to be healed, but the king mourned that he could not do it.

Elisha heard of this Syrian, and so went to him, and told him to dip
himself in the River Jordan seven times, and he would be healed.

After some bickering, Naaman did just that, and was healed by God. His
skin came out of that water just the same as a child’s.

And Naaman said this: Behold now, I know that there is no God in all the
earth, but in Israel; so please take a present from your servant now.

And, as Christ said, there were plenty of lepers in Israel at this time,
but God cleansed only a Gentile.

This would have had much the same effect on the Jews in the synagogue at
Nazareth as the preceding statement. And they became mad as hornet.

With their stimulation lust unabated, they switch over to killer lust.

**John 4:28-30**, “And all in the synagogue were filled with rage when
they heard these things; and they rose up and cast Him out of the city,
and led Him to the brow of the hill on which their city had been built,
in order to throw Him down the cliff. But passing through their midst,
He went His way.”

The adverbial participle AKOUONTES reveals the time of their rage - it
is simultaneous with their hearing Christ’s two illustrations. Because
this is a present participle, there is simultaneous action.

The adjective TAUTA tells us that they were filled with rage upon
hearing both illustrations, because TAUTA is plural - ‘these things’.

The substantive adjective PANTES communicates that every single person
in that synagogue was filled with rage.

THUMOU is the noun for rage. It is the kind of rage that is ecstatic and
unthinking. It describes the total control of emotion over the soul.
Since the same word is often used of human passion, you could say that
they were in an orgy of rage.

Furthermore, the aorist passive verb EPLESTHESAN reinforces the idea of
ecstasy in rage. This comes from PIMPLEMI, a different verb than the
usual PLEROO. This was a special verb when used with words of emotion.
It was used with fear, enthusiasm, even the Old Testament kind of
ecstatic filling of the Spirit.

This is a crowd of people. It is difficult to get an exact figure, but
it is likely to be more than a hundred, even much more. And they are
more than a crowd, for they have turned into a mob.

At the time that this was written, the city of Nazareth sat upon a hill.
The present city is a little more down in the valley. This is a pretty
small town, so the entire crown of the hill was not covered by the town.
The crowd of the synagogue stood up, and took Jesus outside of the city
limits.

There is no record of Christ’s response, verbal or physical, during this
crisis. It is unlikely that any of His disciples were present, though,
so there were no other eyewitnesses than a mob and Himself.

You can be sure that Christ remained poised, even in the crisis, and did
not fear or panic in any way. Such would be sinful, and that was
something that He did not do.

It seems probable that in order to escape the synagogue Christ would
have had to go through the crowd to the exit. There is a good chance
that their synagogues had but one entrance.

So a procession of sorts goes through the streets, with a number of
people leading Christ along to the brow of the Nazareth hill, and kill
Him by throwing Him off the cliff there.

The verb KATAKREMNIZO is quite graphic, and means only one thing: to
chuck someone off a cliff, so as to kill them. It may be like our
English defenestrate, which means to throw someone out a window to kill
them.

But it was not Christ’s time yet. Note this same rage at the death of
Christ more than two years later. There, the people and the Jewish
leadership have constructed an insidious rationale. Here, they really
have nothing but unrequited lust.

The Greek is interesting and yet ambiguous about Christ’s escape. It
says - AUTOS DE DIELTHON DIA MESOU AUTON EPOREUETO. Literally, ’but He
Himself, going through their middle, was on His way."

The intensive use of the personal pronoun AUTOS puts the success of this
maneuver entirely upon the shoulders of Christ.

Poised for the right moment, Christ just turns and slips through their
midst. The leaders may have turned to look down the cliff, while the
rest of the people were still coming up, and could not see who it was.

It is significant to note that the people are full of rage, and in their
ecstasy could be easily duped.

There is no mention at all of Divine intervention here, and Luke, the
meticulous historian, gives full credit to Christ.

The verb POREUETO describes Christ’s egress from the scene of peril. He
did not run, but the imperfect tense portrays a steady pace, and one
that was probably unhurried so as to keep unwanted attention at bay.

So the leaders turn to do their final deed, and Christ is gone! And they
cannot see him for the mob. And the mob comes up to see the end of this
mean man, only to find that He is no longer there! Matthew 4:13-16: “and
leaving Nazareth, He came and settled in Capernaum, which is by the sea,
in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali. This was to fulfill what was
spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,”The land of Zebulun and the
land of Naphtali, by the way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of
the Gentiles - the people who were sitting in darkness saw a great
light, and to those who were sitting in the land shadow of death, upon
them a light dawned."

Isaiah chapter nine has a larger context of the Messiah. It is not just
this, but also several more verses that are Messianic. Later in the
chapter, Isaiah tells of the wonderful counselor, and great ruler, who
is the Messiah. In the first two verses things are more simple: it is
the Messiah, a region, and a condition.

The region includes two areas, Zebulun and Naphtali.

The southern border of Naphtali runs west from the southernmost tip of
the sea of Galilee, where it intersects with the river Jordan, until it
gets to Mt. Tabor. From there it runs North for ten or fifteen miles,
then West for another ten, then North again for forty or fifty miles,
until it gets just past the Leontes river. From there it runs due East
until it again intersects the Northern Jordan river, and then runs back
down to the Sea of Galilee, and around it on the West side until it hits
the southern tip again.

Zebulun occupies an area about twenty miles across, to the Southwest of
Naphtali. It runs southwest until it intersects with the Kishon River.

The condition is really twofold. It has an initial condition, and a
changed condition.

The initial condition is that of darkness. In fact, Christ modifies this
quotation to include something from the Twenty Third Psalm.

The Twenty Third Psalm has that great line… “Yea though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, I fear no evil, for Thou art with
me.”

So they are the people who are sitting in darkness, and those who are
sitting in the land of the shadow of death.

It means that in this region there is little, if any truth. Truth is the
light that shines, and chases the darkness away.

It is the land of the shadow of death, because it is the land of the
enemy, and his shadow lurks over them all, tempting them to reject the
love and light of God.

The final condition is that of great light, and the great light is the
embodiment of truth, Jesus Christ, the Messiah Himself.

The great light is the Messiah.

The dawning of the light is the dawning of the new era of the Messiah
and His kingdom.

The Official Calling of the Disciples
-------------------------------------

Matthew 4:18-22; Mark 1:16-20

Christ has now moved to Capernaum, which will become His headquarters.
Matthew would later call this city Jesus’ own.

Now Christ has already had an impact on these four disciples; they have
come to believe through John the Baptist’s ministry, and through
Christ’s word.

But it is time for Christ to put His disciples to the work of the Lord,
so he put them on recall.

**Matthew 4:18-22**: “And walking by the Sea of Galilee, He saw two
brothers, Simon who was called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a
net into the sea; for they were fisherman. And He said to them, ‘Come
after Me, and I will make you fishers of men.’ And immediately leaving
the nets, and followed Him. And going on from there He saw two other
brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the boat
with Zebedee their father, mending their nets; and He called them. And
they immediately left the boat and their father, and followed Him.”

**Mark 1:16-20**: “And as He was passing through by the Sea of Galilee,
He saw Simon and Andrew, the brother of Simon, casting a net in the sea;
for they were fishermen. And Jesus said to them,”Come after Me, and I
will make you become fishers of men." And immediately leaving the nets,
they followed Him . And going on a little farther, He saw James the son
of Zebedee, and John his brother, who were also in the boat [with
others] mending the nets. And immediately He called them; and they left
their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired servants, and went away
to follow Him."

Both writers agree completely with the details of the calling of Simon
and Andrew.

Christ was walking, passing through by the shore of the sea of Galilee,
just as we left Him in Luke 4. It is the adverbial present participle,
PARAGON, which reveals the circumstantial background to the moment He
saw Simon and Andrew. Apparently He was on His way somewhere else,
perhaps from Nazareth to Capernaum.

He saw the two brothers, as they were casting a net in the sea, for the
purpose of fishing.

So Christ gave them a command - DEUTE OPISO MOU - literally translated,
’come after me." Both accounts agree to the exact wording.

Principle: This is the inspired retelling of this event. It is more
probable that Christ spoke this command in Aramaic, the language of the
day for the region. But, when two gospel writers agree on the exact
Greek translation, you can rest assured that the spirit of the Aramaic
has been captured, without any loss of meaning.

When two or more gospel writers disagree on the exact Greek translation,
then the multiple accounts must harmonize to bring full meaning. The
differences are the work of God the Holy Spirit as well, and they make
the narrative better, not worse.

The second half of Christ’s words of recall to His disciples has to do
with their mission. They are going to be fishers of men.

Mark adds one note to the account of Matthew, and that is the word
GENESTHAI. This is the aorist middle infinite of the deponent verb
GINOMAI, ‘to become.’

Mark’s meaning is a little more graphic as to the nature of their
transformation. It concentrates on function, and not quality.

The aorist tense tells us that the transformation from fishermen to
fishers of men will be immediate. In other words, they will make the
switch immediately. Second, there is no mention of quality here; they
may have been crummy at first.

But remember, Christ had given them intensive training just a few months
before, when they down by the river Jordan. They would have had some
frame of reference for what they were about to do.

The disciples’ response is immediate and sure - leaving their nets they
followed Him. The adverb of time EUTHUS leaves no question as to their
obedience.

These men already had built up a certain amount of trust in Christ. They
were believers in Him, and had begun to know Him.

Their nets were left right where they lay, and their boats, and their
families.

The calling of the second pair of disciples runs very much the same as
the first.

This time, Christ just ‘calls’ them. The implication is that His words
are the same as those that went out to Andrew and Peter.

They too follow immediately.

These four are the only ones mentioned in the narrative, and so are
likely the only ones with Him during this time. It would be only a short
while until the call of Matthew, and a little more time until the twelve
are officially appointed.

The Twelve Disciples
--------------------

### Matthew

God used an outcast. His name is a transliteration of the Aramaic word
which means gift of God.

In his own Gospel, Matthew uses his regular name. In other gospels, the
name Levi is used. It is likely that Matthew became his name after his
conversion.

Matthew was a Jewish tax collector. It is likely that he was fairly well
off financially because of his profession. This makes his decision to
follow Christ all the more remarkable, because he left it all behind -
Lk 5:28. It is likely that he worked at the toll house in Capernaum.

When he decided to follow our Lord, he threw a big party, and invited
all his friends. His decision to follow Christ was immediate.

As a tax collector, Matthew was an outcast in Jewish society. He
apparently had no friends who were devout in the Jewish faith for at his
party there were only other tax collectors and sinners.

The Roman tax collectors were hated by the Jews because the Roman taxes
were in addition to the Jewish taxes.

They were also hated because they represented the occupying forces of
the Roman Empire.

The tax collectors made their living by inflating the Roman taxes. They
essentially worked on commission.

Tax collectors were wealthy, but hated by their own society. They had to
live with a tremendous amount of prejudice.

Because of this prejudice their social options were severely limited.
They could only socialize with others who were outcasts.

It was easy for Matthew to follow Christ, considering his personal
circumstances. Social isolation does not make it easy to enjoy personal
wealth. No doubt he knew of the supernatural essence of Christ’s
ministry, and he may have even heard Him speak. It is often the outcast
that finds it easiest to follow Christ.

Matthew is a rich man who defied the odds.

Remember Matthew if you are an outcast.

### John Boanerges

Cousin “according to the flesh” of Jesus Christ. Brother of James (not
the epistle writer). A native of Galilee. John’s mother Salome was a
follower of Jesus, and ministered to Him of her own means.

John was a fisherman of the Sea of Galilee, his life was hard work, but
apparently it had paid off for his family, because they had servants,
and were able to support the ministry of Jesus Christ. Galilee was a
region somewhat analogous to the U.S. South not too long ago. It is
conservative to a fault, and more than a little rebellious in character.
The fires of rebellion flamed openly in this region. In reality a lot of
senseless violence took place in the name of the zealot movement, but
there was very little virtue. This time was somewhat analogous to that
of Northern Ireland today.

Great humility -

When John the Baptist points out Jesus as the Messiah, John follows
without delay.

Never mentions own name in own Gospel.

Nicknamed, with brother James as the “Sons of Thunder”, a reference to
their manner in Word and Deed, Mk 3:17. It is likely that they had a
fair amount of Zealot ideals in their heads.

Outspoken about his faith from the start.

“The disciple whom Jesus loved” - was the closest to Jesus of the inner
circle of Peter, James, and John.

Was the only eyewitness to the cross among the disciples, and he was
eyewitness to the resurrection, Jn 20.

One of the “Pillars of the Church”, Gal 2:9. Paul had a high regard for
him.

Took over as chief of Apostles some time in the late 70’s.

Did not start writing until late in life.

His writing reflects the 50+ years of careful thought about the life of
Christ and the Christian life.

Under his ministry, Ephesus became the center of the pivot which gave
the Roman Empire its greatest time of prosperity under the Antonine
Caesars, 98-180 A.D.

He used very basic Greek grammar to express incredibly deep theological
ideas.

He was the key figure in the transition from the pre-canon period to the
post canon period.

### Peter

Peter’s name was also Simon. The testimony of Peter always stands behind
the writing of Mark in this epistle.

Overview: Peter is enthusiastic, emotional, swift to speak without
thinking, full of love and anger, sometimes legalistic and snobbish, and
Jewish in a prejudicial way. He is one of the independent, rebellious
Galileans. He loves Christ so much, yet he cannot muster the spiritual
resources to remain with Him in His arrest, trial, and death. He is the
second to the tomb on the third day, and enters first, but did not
believe what he saw.

He is the first of the disciples to see Christ after the resurrection.
He is unsure of his standing with Christ immediately after the
resurrection. Peter is a leader and very much a preacher, though not
careful about what he says. He makes mistakes, he broods, and then he
seeks and needs forgiveness in a desperate emotional way. In the end, he
writes two epistles about suffering, and speaks his remembrances of
Christ in a brief, but humble manner.

If there is one character trait of Peter which rises above all others,
it is his emotionalism. Peter often let his emotions rule his thinking,
much to his detriment and regret.

At the transfiguration of Christ, Peter emotionally desires to build
tabernacles for Christ, Moses, and Elijah. He was not thinking. Mat
17:4.

Such a project would have placed the Messiah on equal footing with the
two prophets.

Such a project hinted at the necessity for these three to grow
spiritually when all three were in a completed state.

In other words, Peter fails to think rationally before he speaks.

At Christ’s prediction of Peter’s denial, Matt 26:35. Peter replies,
“Even if I have to die with You, I will not deny you.” (All the
disciples said the same thing too).

Peter is the instigator here. All the disciples follow his heroic
statement.

All the disciples follow in Peter’s denial, as well.

**John 21:15-17**records Peter’s recovery before Christ, after the
resurrection, "So when they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon
Peter, ‘Simon, son of John, do you love Me more than these?’ He said to
Him, ‘Yes, Lord; You know that I love You.’ He said to him, ‘Feed my
lambs.’ He said to him again a second time, ‘Simon, son of John, do you
love Me?’ He said to Him, ‘Yes Lord; You know that I love You.’ He said
to him, ‘Shepherd my sheep.’ He said to him the third time, ‘Simon, son
of John, do you love Me?’ Peter was grieved because He said to him the
third time, ‘Do you love me?’ And he said to Him, ‘Lord, You know all
things; You know that I love You.’ Jesus said to him, ‘Tend my sheep.’

Peter is still feeling guilt over his denial of Christ at this time,
several days after Christ’s resurrection.

Note that Peter does not blame himself for his failure, but Christ. He
is projecting his failure onto God.

Christ asks Peter if he has agape love for him, and the answer is no.
Only phileo love - friendship. Peter does not feel worthy enough, and so
he describes his love as friendship.

Though Christ commands Peter to feed his sheep, Peter does not feel
qualified to do so, because he is only a friend of Christ.

The second round is identical to the first.

The third round is significant: it is Peter’s second threefold denial of
Christ.

Peter’s grief is founded on Christ’s use of the word phileo the third
time. In essence Christ says, "Do you even like me?’ This because of the
silence after the second command to tend His sheep.

Again, the command of Christ to feed his sheep.

Christ then predicts the kind of death Peter will die, and it is not
what one would consider pleasant. He concludes the prediction with a
command - ’Follow me!"

Peter is momentarily distracted by John, who was following them down the
beach.

Christ cuts to the chase. ‘Follow Me’ is repeated, and that is the end
of the story.

In your life, cut to the chase. Follow Christ. No excuses. No
distractions. Get your eyes off of others, and follow Christ.

Peter is an early leader in the church, but fades from the limelight in
about 50 A.D. Nothing is heard from him until he writes his epistles in
the early 60’s, and then dictates his gospel story to Mark in the
mid-60’s.

Peter wavered on the question of Gentiles and the church. In Acts 10, he
receives direct guidance from the Lord on the subject of whether
Gentiles should be allowed in the church. He responds positively, but
just a few years later, he has to be rebuked by Paul on the very same
subject.

Gal 2:11-14 contains that rebuke. “But when Cephas came to Antioch, I
opposed him to his face, because he stood condemned. For prior to the
coming of certain men from James, he used to eat with the Gentiles; but
when they came, he began to withdraw and hold himself aloof, fearing the
party of the circumcision. And the rest of the Jews joined him in
hypocrisy, with the result that even Barnabas was carried away by their
hypocrisy. But when I saw that they were not straightforward about the
truth of the gospel, I said to Cephas in the presence of all, ’If you,
being a Jew, live like the Gentiles and not like the Jews, how is it
that you compel the Gentiles to live like Jews?”

Probably the best analogy to Peter’s early character is a politician on
the campaign trail. Always promising, always in the limelight, but never
following through.

But Peter recovers, and not long before his death he writes the most
marvelous gospel and two Epistles.

### James Boanerges

What we know about James is mostly related to his much more famous
brother, John. Matt 4:21 communicates that they left the business and
their father behind to follow Christ.

However, before John ever became famous, there was James, who was always
mentioned first among the two brothers, the sons of Zebedee. This can be
because he was older, or because he was the more prominent of the two at
the time.

James was one of the inner circle of three along with Peter and John.
Only they were present at the following events.

The raising of Jairus’ daughter, Mk 8:51; Luke 5:37.

The transfiguration, Mat 17:1; Mk 9:2; Luk 9:28.

The garden of Gethsamene, Mt. 26:37; Mk 14:33.

The Olivet discourse, Mk 13:3.

Strangely, he is missing at the tomb on resurrection morning. This will
always remain a mystery.

James was the first of the true twelve to die for his faith (Judas
Iscariot does not count for obvious reasons). Acts 12:2 records that
Herod Agrippa had him put to death with the sword.

This martyrdom may have been part of the impetus for John’s late
ministry, because it is only after this that John begins to rev up his
engines.

### Andrew, Simon’s brother

Andrew is properly the first disciple of Christ. This is perhaps the
most significant fact of his life. His brother Simon and business
partners James and John followed his lead.

This places him as a leader, though quiet, because he really is not
prominent like Peter, James, and John.

Andrew goes to lead his brother Simon Peter to the Messiah after hearing
John the Baptist point the way. John 1:40-42

After his original call to discipleship, Andrew returned to fishing.
When John the Baptist was placed into prison, Christ came back to
Galilee, where He once again called Simon Peter and Andrew. Mk 1:14-18.

People ask him for advice at the feeding of the five thousand, John 6:8.
He is included in the inner circle at the Mt. of Olives during the last
week of Christ’s life.

### Philip

Philip is from the hometown of Andrew and Peter, Bethsaida. He is
another of those conservative, rebellious Galileans.

There is one character trait that comes out again and again with Philip;
he is practical. By this I mean that he is analytical, naturally a
skeptic, and keeps his feet firmly grounded on planet earth.

This turns out to be an advantage in evangelism. He naturally senses the
protests that unbelievers might make, and so simply says, ‘come and
see’. John 1:46. He describes Christ as the fulfillment of the Law and
the Prophets, the distinction of a careful man. John 1:45.

This turns out to be a handicap in every day life with Christ.

At the feeding of the five thousand, Philip can only see the practical
side of things, and so he leaves out the possibility of a miracle, John
6:4-7. Christ asks a rhetorical question and Philip gives Christ a
non-rhetorical, practical reply. He is more concerned with money than
miracles.

At the last supper, Christ tells his disciples that He is God incarnate,
and that a relationship with the Father comes through Him. Philip then
expresses his desire to see the Father. Christ rebukes him by telling
him again that He is the embodiment of the father, John 14:6-11.

Philip is a good disciple to study for all the skeptics. He probably
out-doubts Thomas.

### James Alphaeus

He is the cousin of Christ. His mother Mary is the sister in law of Mary
the mother of Christ.

He is the father of Jude, the one who wrote the epistle of Jude.

His father is Cleopas, one of the men on the road to Emmaus.

Apart from this we know little, but it appears that he wielded much
influence in his family, for they seemed to all follow Christ.

### Nathanael Bartholomew

This man may be a celebrity, or at least from a famous family.

Bartholomew is the name mentioned in the synoptic gospels. This means
‘Son of Ptolemies" Since this is only a last name it is not specific as
to the actual person behind it. It also may be interpreted ’Son of
Ptolemais’, a city on the North Coast of Palestine, not too far from
Galilee. In modern parlance, ‘the guy from Ptolemais’.

John uses Nathanael, the man’s first name. The difference can be for the
following reasons.

John knew the man’s real name, and the synoptic authors did not. This
may be true if he was just the guy from Ptolemais, but it seems
unlikely, considering that he was with the disciples at the resurrection
and probably for the years in between, unless ‘guy from Ptolemais’ was
just a nickname.

There was a legitimate reason for the synoptic writers to keep the man’s
real name hidden, but this reason was diminished or eradicated by the
time that John wrote some ten or fifteen years later.

The Ptolemies were the royal family in Egypt, and major players in the
events following the death of Alexander the Great in 323 B.C. and the
building of the Roman Empire.

The most famous of all the Ptolemies was none other than Cleopatra of
Egypt.

Ptolemy the 15th was the son of Cleopatra, and it is possible that this
Bartholomew was in this line of descent.

Bartholomew/Nathaniel exhibits an elitist attitude toward Nazareth that
could come from being part of a royal family, or simply from a
neighboring town.

It is interesting to note that Christ says of Nathanael, “a real
Israelite”. The word ‘real’ is translated from the adverb ale.thino.s.
This adverb is one of emphasis on true nature. There is cold and really
cold the kind of cold that penetrates to the bones. There is American,
and there is really American. Not just someone who is born here, but one
who is a John Wayne or George Washington kind of American to the very
core of his being.

But Nathanael Bartholomew is of Egyptian heritage - he could not be a
genetic Jew. But Christ talks about his spiritual heritage as Paul
would… that the true Jew is the one who believes in Him regardless of
his genetic make up.

Christ also comments that Nathanael is without guile, or cunning deceit.
Another way to put it is that Nathaniel is very forthright; he says what
he thinks. Nathanael is a straight-shooter with his words, as he has
just demonstrated with his comment on Nazareth.

Nathanael is possibly from a royal family. His comment is one that a
king would make about a backward country town. But his opinion is honest
and forthright. “Can any good thing come out of Arkansas?”

Nathaniel’s response to Christ’s statement is surprise and disbelief.
“How do you know me?”

Christ responds, “Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig
tree, I saw you.”

We do not know what Nathanael was doing under the fig tree, but it was
certainly related to his forthright nature. There is not much that is
especially supernatural here.

On the basis of Christ’s simple statement, Nathanael believes. It is now
Christ’s turn to register surprise.

On account of Nathaniel’s belief, Christ prophesies: ‘You will see the
heavens opened , and the angels of God ascending and descending on the
Son of Man.’ This is a reference to behind the scenes of prayer. Taking
the prayers to God, and returning the answers to man. However, this is a
literal vision, and so Nathanael will have the gift of seeing behind the
scenes of prayer.

### Thomas

This is the second of the doubters (see Phillip) among the disciples,
although all seem to fail, and doubt is the seed of all failure.

He was a twin, although his sibling is not mentioned at all in the
Bible. Thomas is the Aramaic word for ‘twin’, and the Greek equivalent
didymus was placed alongside it three times in John’s gospel.

**John 11:14-16**, “Then Jesus therefore said to them plainly, ‘Lazarus
is dead, and I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, so that you
may believe; but let us go to him.’ Thomas therefore, who is called
Didymus, said to his fellow disciples, ‘Let us also go, that we may die
with Him.’”

Thomas here displays a rather caustic sense of humor.

Christ is present, yet Thomas says this to his fellow disciples; it was
spoken under his breath.

Verse 8 says that there was imminent danger in Bethany, Lazarus’ home
town - that the disciples and Christ would be stoned if they went there.

Verse 16 reveals that Thomas was the kind of guy that would follow
Christ unto to death, but not without getting his two cents in.

The disciples are not mentioned in the event surrounding Lazarus’
resuscitation, so they actually may have been scared away by Thomas’
remark.

**John 14:1-5**. “Let not your heart be troubled; believe in God,
believe also in Me. In My Father’s house are many dwelling places; if it
were not so, I would have told you; for I go to prepare a place for you.
And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive
you to Myself; that where I am, there you may be also. And you know the
way where I am going.” Thomas said to Him, “Lord, we do not know where
you are going, how do we know the way?”

Thomas here shows a remarkable blindness to Jesus’ discourse.

He misses the point that Christ is making; that He is going to die.
Thomas’ feet are still on terra firma, when they should be in heaven.

He does not know where Christ goes, and therefore he cannot know the
way. At least he is honest.

Christ’s reply is simple: “I am the way, and the truth, and the life; no
one comes to the Father, but through Me.”

**John 20:24-29**. “But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was
not with them when Jesus came. The other disciples therefore were saying
to him, ‘We have seen the Lord!’ But he said to them, ‘Unless I shall
see in His hands the imprint of the nails, and put my finger into the
place of the nails, and put my hand into His side, I will not believe.’
And after eight days again His disciples were inside, and Thomas with
them. Jesus came, the doors having been shut, and stood in their midst,
and said, ‘Peace be with you.’ Then he said to Thomas, ‘Reach here your
finger, and see My hands; and reach here your hand, and put it into My
side; and be not unbelieving, but believing.’ Thomas answered and said
to Him, My Lord and my God!’ Jesus said to him, ‘Because you have seen
Me, have you believed? Blessed are they who did not see, and yet
believed.’”

### Judas the unknown, or Thaddeus, or Lebbaeus

**John 14:21-23** “He who has My commandments and keeps them, he it is
who loves Me; and he who loves Me shall be loved by My Father, and I
will love him, and will disclose Myself to him.‘Judas (not Iscariot)
said to Him, ’Lord, what then has happened that You are going to
disclose Yourself to us, and not to the world?’ Jesus answered and said
to him, ‘If anyone loves Me he will keep My word; and My Father will
love him, and We will come to him, and make Our abode with him.’”

This Judas is pretty astute. Here he wants to know the change. Why the
disclosure? Why the ministry shift?

I found myself immediately wanting to hear more from this man, and yet
he remains silent.

Thaddeus or Lebbaeus means ‘breast’. This may be a clue to this man’s
affectionate or endearing nature, but such is only speculation.

### Simon the Zealot

More often called the Canaanite, which means zealot. We know nothing
more about him.

The Zealots were almost purely a political party. They called for the
violent overthrow of the Roman rule.

They carried on the tradition of the Maccabees - they were militant, and
full of zeal and purpose.

They were the cause of the Jewish wars and the destruction of Jerusalem.

They fought with complete fanaticism to the very end. They were
extremely patriotic, but not many were Godly.

They took their patriotism to great excess, and vowed to strike down all
the enemies of Israel.

Although they were politically correct (not in the modern sense), they
were morally wrong, and in this they were most similar to the southern
U.S. in the early 1800’s.

### Judas Iscariot, the Traitor.

All four of the gospels reveal before the fact that Judas will betray
Jesus Christ, Matt 10:4; Mk 8:19; Luk 6:15; John 6:71.

Luke and John portray him as under the immediate direction of Satan
Himself, Luke 22:3; John 13:27. There is little question from the latter
verse that this man became demon possessed by Satan.

He was the group treasurer, a position that would have been given to a
trustworthy person. John 12:4-7, But Judas Iscariot, one of His
disciples, who was intending to betray Him, said, “Why was this perfume
not sold for three hundred denarii, and given to poor people?” Now he
said this, not because he was concerned about the poor, but because he
was a thief, and as he had the money box, he used to pilfer what was put
into it. Jesus therefore said, “let her alone, in order that she may
keep it for the day of My Burial.”

It was for this same money-grubbing motivation that Judas betrayed our
Lord, and yet 30 pieces of silver was not very much money. His greed
must have been great indeed.

Judas was so trustworthy that even when our Lord implicated Him before
the betrayal, many of the disciples did not believe Him, John 13:28-29.

And yet at the last the scales fall from Judas’ eyes and he realizes
what he has done. Matt 27:3-5, “Then when Judas, who had betrayed Him,
saw that He had been condemned, he felt remorse and returned the thirty
pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, saying, ‘I have sinned
by betraying innocent blood.’ But they said, ’What is that to us? See to
that yourself! And he threw the pieces of silver into the sanctuary and
departed and he went away and hanged himself.”

Judas identifies Christ as honorable blood - one not worthy of betrayal.

Judas has a change of feeling - metamelomai. He now cares about what he
has done. Before he was callused and uncaring. Now he does, but it is
too late.

Judas still views his betrayal as permanent, and kills himself before
the resurrection.

It is difficult to discern from this whether Judas was a believer.

Judas makes a really weak attempt at reparation by attempting to give
the money back. Perhaps he had hoped to have Christ set free on account
of this, but it utterly failed.

Luke puts the right end to the story in Acts 1:15-18. “And at this time
Peter stood up in the midst of the brethren (a gathering of about one
hundred and twenty persons was there together) and said, ’Brethren, the
Scripture had to be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit foretold by the
mouth of David concerning Judas, who became a guide to those who
arrested Jesus. For he was counted among us, and received his portion in
this ministry.” Now this man acquired a field with the price of his
wickedness; and falling headlong, he burst open in the middle and all
his bowels gushed out. And it became known to all who were living in
Jerusalem; so that in their own language that field was called
Hakeldama, that is, Field of Blood).

Judas’ body split open because it had been dead. This was the perfect
contrast to Christ’s death.

The betrayal of Judas is very well documented by Old Testament prophecy.

Many women followed Jesus Christ. The reason is simple: In a society
where women were treated as unimportant, unclean, and generally
inferior, Christ treated them with respect, and placed them on equal
spiritual footing as men. As a result, Christ gained many women
followers who were in many ways more valuable than even His closest
disciples.

### Salome. Mk 15:40; 16:1.

She is the mother of James and John, the husband of Zebedee; she is
Mary, Jesus’ mother’s sister, and so the aunt of Jesus Christ.

Do not mistake Salome with the woman of the same name who demanded John
the Baptist’s head on a platter.

**Mk 15:40-41**, “And there were also some women looking on from a
distance, among whom were Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James
the Less [Alphaeus] and Joses, and Salome. And when He was in Galilee,
they used to follow Him and minister to Him; and there were many other
women who had come up with Him to Jerusalem.”

These women followed Christ - e.kolouthoun, the same verb that is used
of the disciples’ following of Christ. These women are never identified
as disciples proper, and yet they follow just as the disciples do.

These women served Christ - die.konoun, the verb which is the basis for
the spiritual gift of deacon.

Read Mark 16:1-8

This occurs after the initial visit by Mary Magdalene, before sunrise.

They used the excuse of anointing Christ’s body (which they intended to
do anyway) for going to the tomb to investigate Mary’s claim.

The women reported to the eleven disciples and the other followers of
Jesus, but they did not tell any outsiders. This is the explanation for
the final verse.

### Mary from Magdala

**Luke 8:1-3**, “And it came about soon afterwards, that He began going
about from one city and village to another, proclaiming and preaching
the kingdom of God; and the twelve were with Him, and also some women
who had been healed of evil spirits and sicknesses; Mary who was called
Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out, and Joanna the wife of
Chuza, Herod’s steward, and Susanna, and many others who were
contributing to their support out of their private means.”

Here is the introduction to the Ladies’ auxiliary.

Many women were supporting Christ’s ministry from their own means -
making sure that the word was getting out.

**Mk 15:47**, “And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses were
looking on to see where He was laid.”

This is particularly astute, a key to everything that would follow.

As we know from the next verse, 16:1, they found out this piece of
information so that they could care for the body of Christ. Their
motivation was pure, and these two ladies were doing the right thing for
the right reason.

If they had not found out the location of the tomb, then who knows how
long it would have taken for them to locate it.

She is the first witness to the evidence for the resurrection, John
20:1-2, “Now on the first day of the week Mary Magdalene came early to
tomb, while it was still dark, and saw the stone already taken away from
the tomb. And so she ran and came to Simon Peter, and to the other
disciple whom Jesus loved, and said to them, ‘They have taken away the
Lord out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid Him.’”

Now, Mary saw the empty and the angels and heard their declaration, but
she misunderstood. She still assumed the death of Christ.

The ‘they’ here is a reference to the angels.

She goes and finds one of the disciples, and they treat her like Christ
never did. They do not believe her words, and so they decide that they
better check things out for themselves.

### Mary, the sister of Martha and Lazarus

**Luke 10:38-42**tells us that Mary had her priorities straight: “now as
they were traveling along, He entered a certain village; and a woman
named Martha welcomed Him into her home. And she had a sister called
Mary, who moreover was listening to the Lord’s word, seated at His feet.
But Martha was distracted with all her preparations; and she came up to
Him, and said, ‘Lord, do You not care that my sister has left me to do
all the serving alone? Then tell her to help me.’ But the Lord answered
and said to her, ‘Martha, Martha, you are worried and bothered about so
many things; but only a few things are necessary, really only one, for
Mary has chosen the good part, which shall not be taken away from her.’”

This woman had her priorities right.

This was her great opportunity to listen to the gospel from the Lord’s
lips and she was not going to miss it.

She chooses to set aside her responsibilities for the moment, and Christ
vindicates her reasoning.

We choose our lifestyles.

With lifestyle comes obligation and responsibility.

We choose our responsibilities.

Mary could have gotten the information about what Christ said from her
brother Lazarus, after her hostess responsibilities were complete.

Mary recognized that getting the information first hand and face to face
was a priority.

Face to face is always better. Any other medium is inferior and diluted.

**Matthew 26:6-13** tells us of Mary’s anointing of Christ. “Now when
Jesus was in Bethany, at the home of Simon the leper, a woman came to
Him with an alabaster vial of very costly perfume, and she poured it
upon His head as He reclined at the table. But the disciples were
indignant when they saw this, and said, ‘Why this waste? For this
perfume might have been sold for a high price and the money given to the
poor.’ but Jesus, aware of this, said to them, ‘Why do you bother the
woman? For she has done a good deed to Me. For the poor you have with
you always; but you do not always have Me. For when she poured this
perfume upon My body, she did it to prepare Me for burial. Truly I say
to you, wherever this gospel is preached in the whole world, what this
woman has done shall also be spoken of in memory of her.’”

**John 12:1-9** adds some important details to this story. 1. That it
was Judas Iscariot who led the protest against the use of the perfume,
and for seriously wrong motivation. The other disciples were fooled by
his protest. 2. That Lazarus was present at this event, the resuscitated
man who was a perfect backgrounder. 3. That the expensive perfume was
spikenard, from India. Very expensive indeed. 4. That the perfume’s
scent filled the entire house.

This was just two days before the cross. The scent would have still
remained when Christ went to His ordeal. People bathed much less often
than we do in the era of modern plumbing.

The sweet fragrance of the sacrifice of the Lamb of God was literal, as
well as spiritual, thanks to Mary.

Mary, the mother of James Alphaeus. She does not say anything, but
Scripture records her as present at the cross and resurrection. Her
husband is one of those who talked to the resurrected Christ one the
road to Emmaus.

Mary, the mother of Our Lord. She is the greatest of them all, faithful
to her son to the very end.

Acts 1:14 makes it clear that the women were present after the
ascension. No doubt they played an important role in the early church as
well.

Teaching in the Synagogue of Capernaum
--------------------------------------

**Mark 1:21-22**: “And they went into Capernaum; and immediately on the
Sabbath He entered the synagogue and began to teach. And they were
lightning struck at His teaching; for He was teaching them as one having
authority, and not as the scribes.”

**Luke 4:31b-32**: “And He was teaching them on the Sabbath; and they
were lightning struck at His teaching, for His message was with
authority.”

These parallel passages introduce the circumstances surrounding a more
spectacular event. But, they are quite significant in themselves, since
they reveal a striking weakness in the scribes of the day.

Now Christ has gone into this synagogue following the same strategic
initiative as before; to go where the Jews commonly gather. This is a
fulfillment of Matthew 4:17, Mark 1:14-15, and Luke 4:14-15.

He does this on the sabbath, so naturally there would be a crowd there.
It is likely that word of His escape from the angry, murderous mob in
Nazareth has come down here. Since this is on the sabbath, it was at
least a week later; plenty of time for the tale to travel fifteen miles.

Again, Christ begins to teach.

This we draw from Mark 1:21, which has the verb DIDASKEN. This is the
aorist active indicative form of the verb, and it is the inceptive
aorist, which emphasizes the beginning moment of an action.

Furthermore, Christ is again interrupted, much like the last time He
spoke in a synagogue. It is ‘begin’ because He did not finish. Otherwise
we would interpret this as a constantive aorist, which summarizes the
whole of a completed action into one moment of time.

Now as Christ teaches, and before He is interrupted, the audience falls
into a state of amazement.

Both gospel writers describe this amazement with the verb EKPLESSO. This
is a compound verb, composed of a preposition and a regular verb.

The regular verb is PLESSO, which describes a lightning strike, or one
thing striking another with startling quickness. John employs it in Rev
8:12 to describe the striking of the heavenly bodies so that their light
is reduced to one third of their former glory. An asteroid or comet
strike?

The preposition EK adds on to this in order to shows that they are
struck by the authority of Christ, and knocked out of their regular way
of thinking.

“knocked out” is another way to translate this verb, but in reality it
is much stronger than the English idiom implies. “lightning struck” is
much better.

Both verbs are in the passive voice, to show that Christ’s teaching
style produced the strike, and nothing else.

The amazement is brought about by contrast. They are used to the
teaching style of the Scribes, which was apparently much wimpier.

Lack of moral and spiritual resolve results in a lack of authority when
teaching. Maturity means authority.

Christ’s method of authority finds its description in the word EXOUSIA.
We know this one quite well.

It means legitimate authority, and Christ certainly had this.

All who have legitimate authority may teach in their realm with
authority! Whether pastors or businessmen or math teachers or coaches or
drill sergeants.

**Mark 1:23-28**: “And just then there was in their synagogue a man with
an unclean spirit; and he cried out, saying,”What do we have to do with
You, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are
- the Holy One of God!" And Jesus rebuked him, saying, “Be quiet, and
come out of him!” And throwing him into convulsions, the unclean spirit
cried out with a loud voice, and came out of him. And they were all
amazed, so that they debated among themselves, saying, “What is this? A
new teaching with authority! He commands even the unclean spirits, and
they obey Him.” And immediately the news about Him went out everywhere
into all the surrounding district of Galilee."

**Luke 4:33-37**, “And there was a man in the synagogue possessed by the
spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out with a loud voice,”Ha! What
do we have to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy
us? I know who you are - the Holy One of God!" And Jesus rebuked him,
saying, “Be quiet and come out of him!” And when the demon had thrown
him down in their midst, he came out of him without doing him any harm.
And amazement came upon them all, and they began discussing with one
another saying, “What is this message? For with authority and power He
commands the unclean spirits, and they come out.” And the report about
Him was getting out into every locality in the surrounding district."

Luke is the one who gives us the detail that we need for establishing
the existence of disembodied spirits. He says PNEUMA DAIMONIOU
AKATHARTOU - the spirit [soul] of an unclean demon.

Sometimes demons are called spirits, and sometimes demons. But when this
construction occurs, it reveals beyond a shadow of a doubt that this man
had only the spirit, or soul, of a fallen angel.

It definitely stands to reason that a demon cannot enter the body of a
human being with his own body. Instead, his own body must be left
behind. Thus, two possibilities.

One, the demon sets aside his own body for the purpose of possession,
and then returns to it when the possession is through.

Two, the demon has lost his own body as a penalty for past crimes, and
is in fact permanently disembodied.

If this is so, then the disembodied spirit must lust for the sensuality
that a physical body can bring.

This would be so even if the physical body is only human, so much less
than their former angelic bodies.

This would also explain the willingness of many demons on another
occasion to enter the bodies of pigs - Matthew 8:28f.

Mark says, DIDASKEN… EUTHUS.

Christ began to teach, and as He got out His first few words, the
audience was amazed, and then immediately the demon interrupts.

This demon possessed man is a plant. Satan has directed him there, to
interrupt and distract, so that the audience in that synagogue will not
have much of a chance to respond.

The fact that this audience is thunderstruck by Christ’s authoritative
style is a good indicator of their positive disposition to Christ’s
ministry. The demon’s interruption at this moment reinforces that, for
if they were thunderstruck in a negative way, the demon would have
remained quiet.

Luke adds one interjection to the words of the demon, otherwise the two
accounts are identical. Therefore we take Luke’s narrative: “Ha! What do
we have to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us?
I know who you are - the Holy One of God!”

The interjection is “EA!” Its only design is to draw attention away from
what Christ is about to say.

The first phrase is interesting - it is identical to what Christ said to
His mother at the wedding at Cana. That phrase really means, “mind your
own business”.

The demon actually has the nerve to tell the king of kings that He has
no authority in that place, or over him.

Remember, the crowd is amazed by Christ’s authoritative manner, and in a
positive way. The demon not only interrupts, but he also all but tells
the audience that Christ has no business teaching in this way.

The appellation “Jesus of Nazareth” is a jibe at what happened just the
week before. This is a demon, and one way or another he would have the
ability to know about that heinous event at Jesus’ hometown. The demon
designed this statement to anger Jesus, to tempt Him to sin.

Then comes a second statement: “Have you come to destroy us?”

The demon uses the plural pronoun when he refers to himself. Since there
is only one demon (from the preceding verse), this can refer to one of
two things:

The combination of demon soul and human body.

That the demon speaks for all who are present.

Since the issue is authority, and the taunt about Nazareth has occurred
just recently, it is best to take this as everyone there on that day.
You see, the demon questions whether Christ has the authority to destroy
them, since He teaches with so much authority.

There is something more here. The demon attempts to strike fear into the
hearts of those who listen. Can this man destroy them.

And even more… another sarcastic taunt. Christ was the one who was
almost destroyed, just a week before. “You have authority, and yet you
can barely save yourself from destruction.”

Perhaps that demon, and the man he possessed were there in Nazareth.
Perhaps that demon was the mob manipulator on that day.

Completing the mockery is the statement, “I know who you are, the Holy
One of God”.

This mocks the authority and title of Christ.

The demon uses few words, but uses them to extreme effect.

The demon does not testify here to Christ as the messiah, but questions
that existence with sarcasm.

Now the initiative returns to Christ; He must establish His authority
beyond just the way He teaches.

So Christ had to act, and act fast.

He rebuked the demon, saying, “Be quiet and come out from him.”

The verb for rebuke is actually EPITIMAO, and it means to dishonor, or
disrespect someone. In modern parlance, “diss”.

Then come two commands - PHIMOTHETI and EXELTHE.

PHIMOTHETI is the aorist imperative of PHIMOO. This is a command that
you give to your dog - Christ literally says, ‘be muzzled’ or ‘muzzle
yourself’. This is the imperative of command, given from Christ’s
legitimate authority.

EXELTHE is also the aorist imperative, but this time of EXERCHOMAI,
“come out”.

These aorist tenses make it clear that the actions commanded are to
occur immediately, if not sooner.

Since the demon called into question the authority of Christ, Christ had
to establish His authority with everyone present.

And the demon had no choice to obey - the penalty for disobedience would
have been immediate and severe, probably Tartarus.

One last act of violence and defiance - the demon threw the man down
into the middle of the audience in the synagogue. The participle is
HRIPSAN, which means to throw someone or something. Sometimes in anger.

The body was thrown into the midst of the crowd… the man may have been
picked up to some height in order to do so.

However, there was no harm done to the man - even the tossing was all
show.

After this astounding event the crowd became thunderstruck once again -
this time it is THAMBOS, and all at once they are speaking to one
another about the authority of Jesus Christ to command demons, and
exorcise them from a human body.

This then resulted in much publicity for Christ. Adversity had been
turned to advantage.

The Healing of Peter’s Mother in Law
------------------------------------

**Matthew 8:14-17**: “And when Jesus had come to Peter’s home, He saw
his mother-in-law lying sick in bed with a fever. And He touched her
hand, and the fever left her; and she arose, and waited on Him. And when
evening had come, they brought to Him many who were demon-possessed; and
He cast out the spirits with a word, and healed all who were ill in
order that what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet might be
fulfilled, saying,”He Himself took our infirmities, and carried away our
diseases.“”

**Mark 1:29-34**: "And immediately after they had come out of the
synagogue, they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and
John. Now Simon’s mother-in-law was lying sick with a fever; and
immediately they spoke to Him about her. And He came to her and raised
her up, taking her by the hand, and the fever left her, and she waited
on them. And when evening had come, after the sun had set, they began
bringing to Him all who were ill and those who were demon-possessed. And
the whole city had gathered at the door. And He healed many who were ill
with various diseases, and cast out many demons; and He was not
permitting the demons to speak, because they knew who He was.

**Luke 4:38-41**: “And He arose and left the synagogue, and entered
Simon’s home. Now Simon’s mother in law was suffering from a high fever;
and they made request of Him on her behalf. And standing over her, he
rebuked the fever, and it left her; and she immediately arose and waited
on them. And while the sun was setting, all who had any sick with
various diseases brought them to Him; and laying His hands on every one
of them, He was healing them. And demons also were coming out of many,
crying out and saying, ‘You are the Son of God!’ And rebuking them, He
would not allow them to speak, because they knew Him to be the Christ.”

They go right from the synagogue to Simon Peter’s home, where his mother
in law lay sick in bed with a high fever. Notice Luke’s greater
attention to detail - he is the doctor, and so he says it is not only a
fever, PURETO, but a MEGA-PURETO. This is like saying she had a very bad
fever, very dangerous to her life. “Raging fever” would be a good
translation.

They (being Simon and Andrew, James and John) all request that she be
healed. Since she is a loved one, known very well at least by Simon and
Andrew, they make the request from compassion and not lurid interest in
spectacular events.

Christ raises her up, taking her hand in His. This effects the healing,
and it is done.

You will notice in subsequent healings that Christ touches those whom He
heals. Contrast this with demon exorcism, which includes only terse
commands to the demon in question.

Simon’s mother in law then gets up, and waits on Christ, and then all of
them. Mark (Peter) makes it quite clear that her particular attention
was on Christ.

When evening had come, after the sun had set, they (again being the four
present disciples) brought many who will ill and demon possessed.

Although the miracles and healings and exorcisms were validation signs
for the kingdom ministry of Christ, in no way should you construe that
they were only for publicity’s sake. In fact, they were done, every one,
as acts of compassion, and motivated from virtue love.

He cast out the demons with a word, at the same time not permitting them
to speak because they knew who He was. But some of the demons were
coming out, saying “you are the Son of God”.

This is the old reverse psychology tactic. If a demon says to you that a
certain man is the Messiah, you would have a tendency to disagree and
disbelieve such a thing.

Since these demons were doing this, Christ commanded them to silence.

During this period of many healings, Christ did lay His hands on every
one of the ill. From this we get the idea of the laying on of hands,
which of course has been distorted into some pretty silly notions. (see
laying on of hands)

Matthew quotes Isa 53:4, saying that this incident and others like it
were the fulfillment of an Old Testament prophecy.

This is exciting! This is fantastic! Isa 53:4 is the Old Testament
prediction of the atoning sacrifice of Christ. The entire chapter reads
like this: "Who has believed our message? And to whom has the arm of the
Lord been revealed? For He grew up before Him like a tender shoot, and
like a root out of parched ground;

Christ grew up a tender shoot; a perfect young boy in every respect. He
also grew up perfectly in a spiritually bankrupt environment. He has no
stately form or majesty that we should look upon Him, nor appearance
that we should be attracted to Him.

This stands as the only report of the physical countenance of Christ.
His form was not stately or majestic; his appearance was at best neutral
and at worst just downright unattractive. He was despised and forsaken
of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; and like one from
whom men hide their face, He was despised, and we did not esteem Him.

His life, although He was perfect in every way, was filled with grief
and rejection. People treated Him as though He had some deforming
disease or handicap. Surely our griefs He Himself bore, and our sorrows
He carried; yet we ourselves esteemed Him stricken, smitten of God, and
afflicted. But He was pierced through for our transgressions, He was
crushed for our iniquities; the chastening for our well-being fell upon
Him, and by His scourging we are healed.

This here is the atonement. In spite of His atoning sacrifice, Christ is
often considered the recipient of Divine discipline. In a way He was,
but it was our discipline, eternal discipline that He took. All of us
like sheep have gone astray, each of us has turned to his own way; but
the Lord has caused the iniquity of us all to fall on Him. He was
oppressed and He was afflicted, yet he did not open His mouth; like a
lamb that is led to slaughter, and like a sheep that is silent before
its shearers, so He did not open His mouth.

The image of the lamb to the slaughter is quite poignant. The lamb is
silent out of ignorance of what lies ahead. How much greater is our
Lord, who was silent, full-knowing the future ordeal? Would we as
deserving recipients of slaughter keep as silent? By oppression and
judgment He was taken away; and as for His generation, who considered
that He was cut off out of the land of the living, for the transgression
of my people to whom the stroke was due?

Few in His generation realized the import of His atonement and death.
His grave was assigned with wicked men, yet He was with a rich man in
His death, because He had done no violence, nor was there any deceit in
His mouth. But the Lord was pleased to crush Him, putting Him to grief;
if He would render Himself as a guilt offering, he will see His
offspring, he will prolong His days, and the good pleasure of the Lord
will prosper in His hand. As a result of the anguish of His soul, He
will see it and be satisfied; by His knowledge the Righteous One, My
Servant, will justify the many, as He will bear their iniquities.
Therefore, I will allot Him a portion with the great, because He poured
out Himself to death, and was numbered with the transgressors; yet He
Himself bore the sin of many, and interceded for the transgressors."

This makes a clear association between the healings done by Christ and
His atonement on the cross. The healings of physical ailments
foreshadowed the healing of sin on the cross.

The exorcisms foreshadowed the final subduement of demons.

The miracles foreshadowed the fantastic nature of the eternal kingdom.

These things are validations because they are supernatural, and no one
else could do them. But they are also full of meaning.

From this passage we know that Simon Peter was married. This same wife
appears again only once in Scripture, in 1 Cor 9:5, where Paul mentions
that it was Peter’s custom to take her on his missionary journeys.

Because of this very active sabbath night, the whole city had gathered
at the door.

Notice also that no one is worried about Christ doing these things on
the sabbath.

The Second Recall of the Four Disciples
---------------------------------------

**Luke 5:1-11**: “Now it came about that while the multitudes were
pressing around Him and listening to the word of God, He was standing by
the lake of Gennesaret; and He saw two boats lying at the edge of the
lake; but the fishermen had gotten out of them, and were washing their
nets. And He got into one of the boats, which was Simon’s, and asked him
to put out a little way from the land. And He sat down and began
teaching the multitudes from the boat. And when He had finished
speaking, He said to Simon,”Put out into the deep water and let down
your nets for a catch." And Simon answered and said, “Master, we worked
hard all night and caught nothing, but at Your word I will let down the
nets.” And when they had done this, they enclosed a great quantity of
fish; and their nets began to break; and they signaled to their partners
in the other boat, for them to come and help them. And they came, and
filled both of the boats, so that they began to sink. But when Simon
Peter saw that, he fell down at Jesus’ feet, saying, “Depart from me,
for I am a sinful man, O Lord.!” For amazement had seized him and all
his companions because of the catch of fish which they had taken; and so
also James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. And
Jesus said to Simon, “Do not fear, from now on you will be catching men”
And when they had brought their boats to land, they left everything and
followed Him."

This account is significantly different from the one in Matt 4:18-22,
and Mark 1:16-20. Let me show you how this cannot be harmonized, and so
must be a different, and later event.

In Matthew and Mark, Simon and Andrew were not fishing from a boat, and
yet here they are.

In Matthew and Mark, Christ does not enter a boat, and yet here He does.

Matthew and Mark say nothing of the great catch of fish, and yet Luke
does here.

This event in Luke is later because of the parallel sequence followed up
to this point.

Somehow, some way, the disciples went back home again, and took up their
trade. The most probable reason is that they perceived a need for money
or trade - that the logistics seemed weak. But it is clear that this was
not what they should have been doing - that they should have been with
Christ all the time, fishing for men. This becomes clear in the passage.

There is no coincidence here. God led Christ to be here at this exact
hour; see the events unfold from the disciples’ viewpoint: they are
fishing along near the shore of the Sea of Galilee, and there before
them a crowd develops, following and pressing in on one man. Naturally,
it is Jesus, the one that they have left behind. But what do they do? Do
they go to listen to the teaching of the Word? No. Instead they just go
about their business.

It is interesting to note that this is a very positive crowd, and that
they press in to hear the word, and not to receive healings or exorcisms
or witness miracles. But in their zeal to hear Him, they are pushing Him
into the sea.

Christ spies them as they are washing their nets. He goes over and gets
into Simon’s boat and asks him to put out a little way from the land.
Far enough to keep the crowds off, but near enough so that they can
still hear Him. And Simon does so.

So Christ teaches the crowd for a while, and then concludes His message.
Then comes an order. There is a contrast here. Before, Christ asked
Simon for the use of his boat. Now, He orders him out to deeper water,
and to let out his nets for a catch.

Simon’s reply is weak. He is likely exhausted from a night’s fruitless
work. But he is also curiously unbelieving in Christ. He simply goes
through the motion. Now Andrew must have been on board, for at least two
participate in the lowering of the nets.

And straightaway they caught a great quantity of fish, the net was
completely full, so many fish that the nets began to break, and so they
had to call for their partners, and when both boats were working the
full nets, the boats became so overloaded with fish that they began to
sink. And that was enough.

Simon just then drops to his knees before our Lord, and says a curious
thing: “Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord.”

Simon is using the exorcism formula - a formula that he had heard many
times before from the lips of Christ.

Yet his meaning is not that Christ is demon possessed, but that he is.
He tells Christ that he cannot stand to be in His presence any longer on
account of his sin. This rings a bell from our Hosea study. 10. Chapter
Seven, Verse Thirteen: “Woe to them, for they have fled from Me!
Destruction is theirs, for they have rebelled against Me! I would redeem
them, but they speak lies against Me.”

Verse thirteen is another discipline summary. It is a summary of the
case of God vs. Israel.

Israel has strayed from God. So, woe to them.

God, through Hosea, employs the interjection ’OY. This is an impassioned
expression of grief and despair. It is even onomatopoetic, evincing the
sound that comes forth involuntarily from one’s mouth at the moment that
the bad news is heard.

God says that they will have this experience because they have strayed,
’KNEADED. This verb holds the connotation of panicked flight. Israel
flees from God because they fear a face to face confrontation. Yet, this
confrontation is in reality the only thing that will save them. Lesson:
never fear what is best for you. If it is best for you to go to God and
confess your sins in humble repentance, then do so, and without fear.

Israel has rebelled against God. So, destruction is theirs.

The word for rebel is PHAS\`U. It can describe personal or national
rebellion. An interesting note: it too holds the connotation of fear. It
reveals that fear always stands as the motivation for rebellion, in the
negative sense of the word.

The rebellion of Israel from God has brought on SOR, ‘devastation’.
Always, always, this word contains the idea of violence. A violent
destruction waits for this fearful, rebellious nation.

Israel speaks lies against God. So, they do not receive redemption.

This nation has gone so far in the cosmic system that they have begun to
speak Satanic propaganda against God. They are now the propaganda
ministers of the devil.

PADAH is the Hebrew word for redemption. In the age of Israel, this
redemption would have been both spiritual and national. The nation would
have been renewed, were they not now the friends of the enemy. 11. This
would not be the last time that Peter would do this very thing.

John 21:15-17 records Peter’s recovery before Christ, after the
resurrection, "So when they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon
Peter, ‘Simon, son of John, do you love Me more than these?’ He said to
Him, ‘Yes, Lord; You know that I love You.’ He said to him, ‘Feed my
lambs.’ He said to him again a second time, ‘Simon, son of John, do you
love Me?’ He said to Him, ‘Yes Lord; You know that I love You.’ He said
to him, ‘Shepherd my sheep.’ He said to him the third time, ‘Simon, son
of John, do you love Me?’ Peter was grieved because He said to him the
third time, ‘Do you love me?’ And he said to Him, ‘Lord, You know all
things; You know that I love You.’ Jesus said to him, ‘Tend my sheep.’

Peter is still feeling guilt over his denial of Christ at this time,
several days after Christ’s resurrection.

Note that Peter does not blame himself for his failure, but Christ. He
is projecting his failure onto God.

Christ asks Peter if he has agape love for him, and the answer is no.
Only phileo love - friendship. Peter does not feel worthy enough, and so
he describes his love as friendship.

Though Christ commands Peter to feed his sheep, Peter does not feel
qualified to do so, because he is only a friend of Christ.

The second round is identical to the first.

The third round is significant: it is Peter’s second threefold denial of
Christ.

Peter’s grief is founded on Christ’s use of the word phileo the third
time. In essence Christ says, "Do you even like me?’ This because of the
silence after the second command to tend His sheep.

Again, the command of Christ to feed his sheep.

Christ then predicts the kind of death Peter will die, and it is not
what one would consider pleasant. He concludes the prediction with a
command - ’Follow me!"

Peter is momentarily distracted by John, who was following them down the
beach. l. Christ cuts to the chase. ‘Follow Me’ is repeated, and that is
the end of the story.

In your life, cut to the chase. Follow Christ. No excuses. No
distractions. Get your eyes off of others, and follow Christ. 12. James
and John were also seized with amazement and humility. Interesting, but
Andrew is not mentioned at all with regard to response. Two
possibilities. He was already positive, or he remained negative. I
choose the former. 13. Christ now reiterates His former command: “From
now on you will be catching men.” This was probably spoken in a firmer
tone than before. Nonetheless, they obey. 14. Also, there was a miracle
performed here. A once in a lifetime gathering of fish… See how the
miracle is just done, with no reference to hands or touching or
anything. It is still done by the spiritual gift and the power of God
the Holy Spirit.

Miracles were most properly signs of the valid ministry of Christ.

The laying on of hands was a symbol of the Messiah.

The first healing, of the royal man’s son in Capernaum, was more
properly a miracle, and is identified as such within the passage, John
4:46-54. It had to do with the time of the recovery, and not the healing
itself. That healing may have occurred on its own, since nowhere does it
say that Christ performed it.

Cleansing of a Leper
--------------------

**Matthew 8:2-4**: “And behold, a leper came to Him, and bowed down to
Him, saying,”Lord, if You are willing, You can make me clean." And He
stretched out His hand and touched him, saying, “I am willing; be
cleansed.” And immediately his leprosy was cleansed." And Jesus said to
him, “See that you tell no one; but go, show yourself to the priest, and
present the offering that Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.”

Mark 1:40-45: “And a leper came to Him, beseeching Him and falling on
his knees before Him, and saying to Him,”If you are willing, You can
make me clean." And moved with compassion, He stretched out His hand,
and touched him, and said to him, " I am willing; be cleansed." And
immediately the leprosy left him and he was cleansed. And He sternly
warned him and immediately sent him away, and He said to him, “See that
you say nothing to anyone; but go, show yourself to the priest and offer
for you cleansing what Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.” But he
went out and began to proclaim it freely and to spread the news about,
to such an extent that Jesus could no longer publicly enter a city, but
stayed out in unpopulated areas; and they were coming to Him from
everywhere."

**Luke 5:12-16**: “And it came about that while He was in one of the
cities, behold, there was a man full of leprosy; and when he saw Jesus,
he fell on his face and implored Him, saying,”Lord, if You are willing,
You can make me clean." And He stretched out His hand, and touched him,
saying, “I am willing; be cleansed.” And immediately the leprosy left
him. And He ordered him to tell no one, “But go and show yourself to the
priest, and make an offering for your cleansing, just as Moses
commanded, for a testimony to them.” But the news about Him was
spreading even farther, and great multitudes were gathering to hear Him
and to be healed of their sicknesses. But He Himself would often slip
away to the wilderness and pray."

This occurs in one of the cities in the region of Galilee.

The account follows the usual formula for healing; the man asks; Christ
touches; the healing comes to pass.

The man’s ailment is significant: it is leprosy, and when one recovered
from this disease he was required by the law to make a ritual sacrifice.

Leprosy originated in Egypt, and probably at some time during the
slavery of Israel there, 1800-1400 B.C. It is definitely an Egyptian
disease.

Since the children of Abraham were living in Egypt, and under somewhat
trying conditions, it would have been very difficult for them to avoid
it, and apparently they did not.

The book of Leviticus has a very detailed symptomology of the disease,
and is quite strict on the necessity of quarantine. See Lev 13 and 14.

The disease itself was considered completely incurable until 1960, A.D.
Because of this, when someone did recover, it was an outright miracle.
Thus the offerings.

Leprosy is caused by a bacterial organism very similar to the one that
causes tuberculosis. Indeed, the two may have a common ancestor. In all
of its forms it is a very hideous disease, and can at some points be
quite infectious. Hence the Scriptural caution of quarantine.

In some instances, Leprosy resulted from sinfulness. Miriam’s judgment
of Moses for his genetically (Egyptian) Gentile wife resulted in the
disease. She had it for seven days only. Moses had the disease for a
moment, as a sign of God’s power to him (Ex 4:6). Naaman the Syrian had
it, and became healed. He was commanded to undergo seven cleansings in
the river Jordan.

The man’s faith is remarkable: he says, “if you are willing, you can
make me clean.” Notice how very grace oriented this is - it all depends
on Christ. Christ’s response is apropos - “I am willing…”

This sacrifice would be one attended by a priest, and so Christ sent the
man in that direction, so that the priests would have a testimony of
Christ’s messianic powers. At the same time, Christ makes it clear that
he is to tell no one else. The ex-leper blew it.

In light of what we know about healings, and how they pointed to the
atonement, there is additional symbolism here. The sacrifices for a
healed leper were sacrifices based on the atonement of the Messiah.

These sacrifices were all but forgotten in Israel. The last recorded one
to be healed from the disease was a Syrian, Naaman.

That a priest would be asked to make this ritual would have been
completely unheard of, and therefore a real attention getter.

The ritual went like this:

The priest collected two clean live birds, cedar wood, a scarlet string,
and hyssop.

The first part of the ritual involved killing one bird over an
earthenware vessel and under running water. Interestingly enough, the
word for running is actually ‘living’. This etymological observation may
explain the initial confusion with the woman at the well.

Then the wood, the string, the hyssop, and the still living bird, and
dip them all together into the blood of the already sacrificed bird.

The bird, the branch, the string, and the hyssop are then shaken toward
the newly healed individual, sprinkling him or her with the blood and
water from the first bird.

Immediately after the sprinkling, the still living bird is set free.

What this all adds up to is a symbolization of the miraculous recovery.

The killing of one bird and the freeing of another has obvious
symbolism. The healed leper should by all rights be doomed to a horrible
life and death. Only the intervention of God has saved him. He should be
the dead bird, but instead he is the living one, free from a terrible
disease. It also symbolizes the killing of Christ so that we might have
freedom from sin.

The cedar wood was one of exceptionally fine quality, and it represents
the body of the now healed leper. Because of its hardness and also its
fragrance add it to a tree that is extremely resistant to disease. This
is also the new state of the leper. It also points to the perfect body
of Christ on the cross.

The hyssop was well known as a fragrant herb, similar to Thyme and
Marjoram. Due to the feathery spines on its stalk, it was ideal for use
as a sprinkling device. Therefore it came to be a symbol for the
purification from sin, Psalm 51:7. Someone used it at the cross to
extend a sponge full of wine to Christ. It also represents the saving of
Israel in the Exodus and the Passover feast.

The scarlet thread is a little more difficult. The scarlet dye was
manufactured through the crushing of a certain species female worm.
Christ called himself a worm,

TOLAH refers to the coccus iliacus, a very unusual worm which was
harvested, crushed, put into a very large vat. In this manner, its blood
was used for the purpose of making a crimson dye used to color king’s
robes in the ancient world.

On the cross, the perfect and impeccable humanity of Christ was crushed
with the judgment of our sins. Therefore, He calls Himself TOLAH, for
the weight of those sins crushed Him as He was being judged for them.

So the imputation and judgment of our sins in Christ on the cross by God
the Father is analogous to the worm being crushed in a vat, so that its
blood can be used for the manufacture of royal robes.

Because our Lord was judged for our sins on the cross, we now wear the
royal robes of His imputed righteousness. We were imputed with the
righteousness of God the Father, and we share the righteousness of
Christ through the baptism of the Spirit.

Summary: the healing of a leper was also a celebration of the atonement
of the Messiah on the cross. When Christ ordered the leper to present
himself to the priests, it would have been a testimony that He was that
atoning Messiah.

Naturally, this would have resulted in a great deal of publicity, and
because that information pointed to Christ as Messiah, some of that
would have been negative publicity.

From this point, Christ could no longer publicly enter a city. Instead,
He generally stayed out in the countryside, and pray.

The Forgiving and Healing of a Paralytic
----------------------------------------

**Matthew 9:1-8**: “And getting into a boat, he crossed over, and came
to His own city. And behold, they were bringing to Him a paralytic,
lying on a bed; and Jesus seeing their faith said to the paralytic,”Take
courage, My son, your sins are forgiven." And behold, some of the
scribes said to themselves, “This fellow blasphemes.” And Jesus knowing
their thoughts said, “Why are you thinking evil in your hearts? For
which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Rise and
walk’? But in order that you may know that the Son of Man has authority
on earth to forgive sins” - then He said to the paralytic - “Rise, take
up your bed, and go home.” And he rose, and went home. But when the
multitudes saw this, they were filled with awe, and glorified God, who
had given such authority to men."

**Mark 2:1-12**: “And when He had come back to Capernaum several days
afterward, it was heard that He was at home. And many were gathered
together, so that there was no longer room, even near the door; and He
was speaking the word to them. And they came, bringing to Him a
paralytic, carried by four men. And being unable get to Him because of
the crowd, they removed the roof above Him; and when they had dug an
opening, they let down the pallet on which the paralytic was lying. And
Jesus seeing their faith said to the paralytic,”My son, your sins are
forgiven." But there were some of the scribes sitting there and
reasoning in their hearts, “Why does this man speak that way? He is
blaspheming; who can forgive sins but God alone?” And immediately Jesus,
aware in His spirit that they were reasoning that way within themselves,
said to them, “Why are you reasoning about these things in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven’; or
to say, ‘Arise, and take up your pallet and walk’? But in order that you
may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins” -
He said to the paralytic - I say to you, rise, take up your pallet and
go home." And he rose and immediately took up the pallet and went out in
the sight of all; so that they were all amazed and were glorifying God,
saying, “We have never seen anything like this.”

**Luke 5:17-26**: “And it came about one day that He was teaching; and
there were some Pharisees and teachers of the law sitting there, who had
come from every village of Galilee and Judea and from Jerusalem; and the
power of the Lord was present for Him to perform healing. And behold,
some men were carrying on a bed a man who was paralyzed; and they were
trying to bring him in, and to set him down in front of Him. And not
finding any way to bring him in because of the crowd, they went up on
the roof and let him down through the tiles with his stretcher, right in
the center, in front of Jesus. And seeing their faith, he said,”Friend,
your sins are forgiven you." And the scribes and the Pharisees began to
reason, saying, “Who is this man who speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive
sins, but God alone?” But Jesus, aware of their reasonings, answered and
said to them, “Why are you reasoning in your hearts? Which is easier, to
say, ‘Your sins have been forgiven you,’ or to say, ‘Rise, and walk’?
But in order that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on
earth to forgive sins” - He said to the paralytic - “I say to you, rise,
and take up your stretcher and go home.” And at once he rose up before
them, and took up what he had been lying on, and went home, glorifying
God. And they were all seized with astonishment and began glorifying
God; and they were filled with fear, saying, “We have seen remarkable
things today.”

Jesus returns from the city where he had healed the leper and once again
pointed to his atonement. In the mean time, He had become ever more
popular, and could hardly enter a city without a great uproar, and the
formation of a crowd. This is the reason for the sea-borne transport -
He could swiftly cross over with the fear of the assembly of a
bothersome crowd. Matthew calls Capernaum Jesus’ own city - it was where
he had received the most positive volition, and where He was living for
the time being. His headquarters as it were.

When He had enjoyed several days of rest and anonymity, the people found
Him at home, and so a great crowd gathered. This crowd was composed of
Pharisees and Scribes from all over Galilee and Judea, and even from
Jerusalem. They had put together an investigative committee to see what
the big deal with Jesus was all about. There was no room - standing room
only. He took the opportunity to begin teaching.

The power of the Lord was unto him for healing. Luke says it in 5:17:
KAI DUNAMIS KURIOU EN EIS TO IASTHAI AUTON. A. This is important. Here
it says clearly, explicitly, that Christ heals by the power of the Lord,
and not by the power of His own deity as the second person of the
Godhead. This is the exact representation of the doctrine of kenosis.

Also, there is an implication that there were times when the power was
not available. So this was a God given and directed power, and God chose
the timing. It includes self awareness of that power. In some way,
Christ could detect what was going on, and be prepared to heal.

There was a paralytic who desired to be healed. However, he could not
get through the crowd to Christ, even with help from four others, who
bore him on a bed or pallet. It was their intent to lay the paralyzed
man in front of Jesus (they may have known the thing about touching).

Thwarted by the crowd (and can’t you just see the Pharisees and Scribes
refusing to budge), the four men then manage to get their charge up onto
the roof, and then to dig and remove tiles immediately over the head of
Christ. They are persistent, and this is enough for Christ. They let him
down right in front of Christ. And by the way, another great sermon was
interrupted, but our Lord is quite skillful at turning these kinds of
interruptions into opportunity. Besides, He recognized in them a great
faith.

Christ’s words are a shock to the Scribes and Pharisees. He says, “My
child, your sins are forgiven you.” Luke has a difference here with the
other synoptic writers.

The reason for Luke’s difference is one of tone verses literal wording.

Christ’s tone in speaking these words was gentle and compassionate. Even
though He spoke literally the word ANTHROPE, He said it so gently and
compassionately that Matthew and Mark were compelled to translate it
from the Aramaic as TEKNON.

When Christ tells the paralytic that his sins are forgiven, this should
be nothing new to the Scribes and Pharisees. They should know better.

Christ does not actually say, “I forgive you by my authority”. He uses
the passive voice, and so only indicates that the source of the
paralytic’s forgiveness is outside of his power.

Furthermore, in the Old Testament, others are given the authority to
communicate the forgiveness of God to His people.

Through a priest in the ritual sin offering, Lev 4:20.

Through an angel in Isaiah 6:7.

The thought process does not match what Christ said, the Scriptures, nor
is it even honest with their own practice.

Christ, by saying these words, did not necessarily imply that He was the
atonement, or that He had the authority to forgive.

The Old Testament has a prescription for forgiveness which could include
the pronouncement by man or angel of the thing which God had done.

The priesthood held it to their own right that they should conduct the
sacrifices and rituals, and thus by them forgive the sins of the people.
This was a gross perversion of their office, but nonetheless they did
become this presumptuous.

Really, the indignation of the Scribes and Pharisees comes from their
feeling that Christ is impinging on their territory. Territory that they
had obtained illicitly. The hypocrisy of the Pharisees on this occasion
is quite evident. When they said to Christ that He was a blasphemer and
that forgiveness was the realm of God, what they meant that was they did
not want Christ to take over their position as the forgiver of the
people.

So Christ must demonstrate to the Pharisees that He really does have the
authority to tell this paralytic that he is forgiven.

He first reasons with the Pharisees, in order to point out their
hypocrisy.

Which is easier to say: ‘Your sins are forgiven’ or ‘Rise up and walk’?
It was easy for the Scribes and Pharisees to tell their charges that
their sins were forgiven. They would just say the words, and the people
would feel good.

But could the scribes speak with authority, and tell the man to rise and
walk? They were completely and totally helpless in this regard.

So Christ points out to the Jewish leadership that there is a vital
difference between He and them: He has the power of God, and they do
not. He has the authorizing, validating gifts of the Spirit and they are
impotent beside Him.

And then He says the words (no mention of touch is here, but it was
present - Luke 4:40 is still in effect at this time) SOI LEGO, EGEIRE
KAI ARAS TO KLINIDION SOU POREUOU EIS TON OIKON SOU. “I say to you, rise
and take up your pallet, go to your home”.

But notice something else - that Christ refers to Himself as the Son of
Man. This was a Messianic term. (Son of Man)

And so the paralytic did exactly as Jesus commanded.

The Call of Matthew
-------------------

**Matthew 9:9**: "And as Jesus passed on from there, He saw a man,
called Matthew, sitting in the tax office; and He said to him, ‘Follow
Me!’ And he rose, and followed Him.

**Mark 2:13-14**: “And he went out again by the seashore; and all the
multitude were coming to Him, and He was teaching them. And as He passed
by, He saw Levi the son of Alpheus sitting in the tax office, and He
said to him, ‘Follow Me!’ And he rose and followed Him.”

**Luke 5:27-28**: “And after that He went out, and noticed a
tax-gatherer named Levi, sitting in the tax office, and he said to him,
‘Follow Me.’ And he left everything behind, and rose and began to follow
Him.”

Christ passes on from his headquarters at Capernaum to a place by the
seashore. Since Capernaum was a seaside town, this was probably not very
far at all.

Again Christ was mobbed by the crowds - this time the crowds of
commoners, and not Pharisees and Scribes.

Christ and the crowd are moving from one place to another, and just then
He noticed a tax-collector sitting in his office.

Matthew and Mark portray this event as a slam bang affair - as though it
just happened so quickly that you would hardly know what hit you.

Luke is much more matter of fact, but his account allows for the spirit
of Matthew and Mark.

Christ orders Matthew to follow Him. It is the present active imperative
of AKOLOUTHEO. Since the verb is in the present tense, it indicates that
the act of following should be durative.

And Matthew left everything and rose and followed Christ! Instant
obedience, and this from one the religious types of Israel would have
nothing to do with.

Matthew - God used an outcast. His name is a transliteration of the
Aramaic word which means gift of God.

In his own Gospel, Matthew uses his regular name. In other gospels, the
name Levi is used. It is likely that Matthew became his name after his
conversion.

Matthew was a Jewish tax collector. It is likely that he was fairly well
off financially because of his profession. This makes his decision to
follow Christ all the more remarkable, because he left it all behind -
Lk 5:28. It is likely that he worked at the toll house in Capernaum.

As a tax collector, Matthew was an outcast in Jewish society. He
apparently had no friends who were devout in the Jewish faith for at his
party there were only other tax collectors and sinners.

The Roman tax collectors were hated by the Jews because the Roman taxes
were in addition to the Jewish taxes.

They were also hated because they represented the occupying forces of
the Roman Empire.

The tax collectors made their living by inflating the Roman taxes. They
essentially worked on commission.

Tax collectors were wealthy, but hated by their own society. They had to
live with a tremendous amount of prejudice.

Because of this prejudice their social options were severely limited.
They could only socialize with others who were outcasts.

It was easy for Matthew to follow Christ, considering his personal
circumstances. Social isolation does not make it easy to enjoy personal
wealth. No doubt he knew of the supernatural essence of Christ’s
ministry, and he may have even heard Him speak. It is often the outcast
that finds it easiest to follow Christ.

Matthew is a rich man who defied the odds.

Remember Matthew if you are an outcast.

Matthew’s Banquet for Christ
----------------------------

**Matthew 9:10-13**: “And it happened that as He was reclining at the
table in the house, behold many tax-gatherers and sinners came and were
dining with Jesus and His disciples. And when the Pharisees saw this,
they said to His disciples, ‘Why is your Teacher eating with the
tax-gatherers and sinners?’ But when He heard this, He said, ‘It is not
those who are healthy who need a physician, but those who are sick. But
go and learn what this means, ’I desire compassion, and not sacrifice’
for I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners.”

**Mark 2:15-17**: “And it came about that He was reclining at the table
in his house, and many tax-gatherers and sinners were dining with Jesus
and His disciples; for there were many of them, and they were following
Him. And when the scribes of the Pharisees saw that He was eating with
the sinners and tax-gatherers, they began saying to His disciples, ‘Why
is He eating and drinking with tax-gatherers and sinners?’ And hearing
this, Jesus said to them, ‘It is not those who are healthy who need a
physician, but those who are sick; I did not come to call the righteous,
but sinners.’”

**Luke 5:29-32**: “And Levi gave a big reception for Him in his house;
and there was a great crowd of tax-gatherers and other people who were
reclining at the table with them. And the Pharisees and their scribes
began grumbling at His disciples, saying, ‘Why do you eat and drink with
the tax-gatherers and sinners?’ And Jesus answered and said to them, ‘It
is not those who are well who need a physician, but those who are sick.
I have not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.’”

Matthew’s reminiscence is the best, and he adds one thing that Mark and
Luke overlook. It is a most important detail, especially for Jews, and
we will get to it.

Matthew held a big reception at his own home for Christ, and invited his
tax-collector buddies, and also many sinners were there as well. None of
the accounts define just what kind of sinners they were, but in order to
gain this appellation they would have been those who were public
outcasts. This was truly the outcast’s ball.

And Christ is reclining right at the table with them, eating and
drinking. No doubt he was also making good of the time to communicate
truth.

The Scribes of the Pharisees and the Pharisees participate in a coy and
solicitous conspiracy against Christ.

They target Christ’s disciples, thinking that they may be susceptible to
their conspiratorial lies.

They are attempting to make Christ look bad in front of His disciples.
Public opinion was extremely strong against the category of people who
were at this banquet. They wanted to manipulate that public opinion in
order to destroy Christ. But it was not the proper time yet.

Christ overhears their coy solicitations, and so He speaks to them a
principle: ‘It is not those who are well who need a physician, but those
who are sick. I have not come to call the righteous but sinners to
repentance.’

This can be posted on the doorframe of every local church. Every
ambassador for Christ must remember this principle.

The local church is never to be some kind of social club for the
self-righteous, or a place where only people with nice and friendly
personalities are allowed to be

There is a time for the sinner to grow up, but there is also a place for
the sinner-beginner to learn the Word of God and learn how to apply it.

Luke, the physician would have loved this statement. It may have been
one of the most important things that he had ever heard, even if it was
told to him many years after it took place.

Matthew recalls that Christ quoted Hosea 6:6 as a reproof to the
Pharisees. It was the perfect verse for them to hear.

In fact, Matthew would recall when Christ quoted this verse on another
occasion, in chapter 12 verse 7 of his gospel.

Verse Six: “For I delight in virtue love, and not sacrifice; and
knowledge of God instead of whole burnt offerings.”

The first verb is haphets, and its meaning reveals a sensual and
emotional response to stimuli.

It is used of sexual delight for both men and women, and for matters and
things that are fun to do. It is pleasure of any kind, and is the basis
for many systems of motivation.

It is in the qal perfect, which here reveals a principle of God’s
nature. This verse reveals God’s very soul.

The object of God’s delight is hesed - virtue love and the sum of human
virtue in every expression of character. hesed is the revelation of
motivation as it extends from the complex of thought in the soul. And
God delights in this.

The converse of hesed is zabhah, the actual slaughter of the sacrificial
animals. The picture here is the actual act of sacrifice. God does not
delight in the acts of sacrifice. He created the animals, too. They, too
are the objects (thought lesser) of His pleasure, and in sacrifice they
are destroyed. God does not take pleasure in that, nor does he delight
in just the act.

The Jews had gotten to the point where the ritual system meant
absolutely nothing to them; where they just went through the motions,
without the slightest thought of the representation.

And yet the sacrifices of the ritual system were magnificent
representations of Bible doctrine. The rituals taught many aspects of
Divine character and interaction with sinful mankind.

The ritual system was an ingenious way to teach Bible truth, and it was
never designed for just going through the motions in order to please
God.

Going through the motions was a part of idolatry, but it was not any
part of the plan of God. The idolaters perceived going through the
motions as a way to please the idol and soothe his wrath, and bring his
blessing.

Going through the motions is anti-relationship, and is a philosophy that
keeps its adherents ignorant of the person of God.

The second half of the parallel statement is similar, but brings its own
distinctions.

yadha is the intimate kind of relationship knowledge that God earnestly
desires. He wants His people to have a knowledge of Him.

the converse of yadha is again a part of the ritual system: it is the
whole burnt offering, the me\`oloth. But the idea again is relationship,
and so it has been since the beginning of time.

Genesis 1:26-27, “Then God said, ‘Let us make man in Our image,
according to Our likeness…’” a. Why are we made in His image? So that we
might have a relationship with Him, and bring praise to His name. b. The
image is the soul image, not the physical one. God is not just a really
big human being.

In the garden, there was a spiritual time of day, a time when the man
and the woman would meet with God. It was relationship from the very
beginning. Gen. 3:8, “And they heard the sound of the Lord walking in
the garden in the spiritual time of the day.”

All of the patriarchs and great believers of old were such because of
their quality relationship with God. Noah, Abraham, Moses, Ruth, Esther,
Rahab - all are great because they know Him and reflect His greatness in
their own lives.

The ten commandments are based on relationship with God, Ex 20:1-3,
“Then God spoke all these words, saying, ’I am the Lord your God, who
brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. You
shall have no others gods before Me.”

All of the covenants to Israel were based on the precept that they must
function in the framework of relationship with God.

**Deuteronomy 6:1-9** says it best, “Now this is the commandment, the
statutes and the judgments which the Lord your God has commanded me to
teach you, that you might do them in the land where you are going over
to possess it, also that you and your son and your grandson might fear
the Lord your God, to keep all His statutes and His commandments, which
I command you, all the days of your life, and that your days may be
prolonged. O Israel, you should listen and be careful to do it, that it
may be well with you and that you may multiply greatly just as the Lord,
the God of your fathers, has promised you, in a land flowing with milk
and honey. Hear O Israel! The Lord is our God, the Lord is one! And you
shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul
and with all your might. And these words, which I am commanding you
today, shall be on your heart; and you shall teach them diligently to
your sons and shall talk of them when you sit in your house, and when
you walk by the way and when you lie down and when you rise up. And you
shall bind them as a sign on your hand and they shall be as frontlet
bands on your forehead. And you shall write them on the door posts of
your house and on your gates.”

The content of this verse is quite valid in the church age. Never get
means mixed up with substance. a. The means is the ritual system, or in
our dispensation the study of the word. b. The substance is a
dispensational constant, that is, it is valid at all times in human
history. The substance is relationship with God.

We must never ritualize relationship with God. To ritualize that is to
trivialize it. God never intended for something so personal to be
institutionalized or monopolized in any way.

The means are there for a reason, and are to be employed to maximum
advantage. But the means are never going to be the substance, and God is
never, ever pleased just by your ‘doing’ the means.

The Dispensational Change
-------------------------

**Matthew 9:14-17**: “Then the disciples of John came to Him,
saying,”Why do we and the Pharisees fast, but Your disciples do not
fast?" And Jesus said to them, “The attendants of the Bridegroom cannot
mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them, can they? But the days
will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they
will fast. But no one puts a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment;
for its fullness pulls up from the garment, and a worse tear results.
Nor do men put new wine into old wineskins; otherwise the wineskins
burst and the wine pours out, and the wineskins are ruined; but they put
new wine into fresh wineskins, and both are preserved.”

**Mark 2:18-22**: “And John’s disciples and the Pharisees were fasting;
and they came and said to Him,”Why do John’s disciples and the disciples
of the Pharisees fast, but Your disciples do not fast?" And Jesus said
to them, “While the bridegroom is with them, the attendants of the
bridegroom do not fast, do they? So long as they have the bridegroom
with them, they cannot fast. But the days will come when the bridegroom
is taken away from them, and then they will fast in that day. No one
sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; otherwise the patch
pulls away from it, the new from the old, and a worse tear results. And
no one puts new wine into old wineskins; otherwise the wine will burst
the skins, and the wine is lost, and the skins as well; but one puts new
wine into fresh wineskins.”

**Luke 5:33-39**: “And they said to Him,”The disciples of John often
fast and offer prayers; the disciples of the Pharisees also do the same;
but Yours eat and drink." And Jesus said to them, “You cannot make the
attendants of the bridegroom fast while the bridegroom is with them, can
you? But the days will come; and when the bridegroom is taken away from
them, then they will fast in those days.” And He was also telling them a
parable: “No one tears a piece from a new garment and puts it on an old
garment; otherwise he will both tear the new, and the piece from the new
will not match the old. And no one puts new wine into old wineskins;
otherwise the new wine will burst the skins, and it will be spilled out,
and the skins will be ruined. But new wine must be put into fresh
wineskins. And on one, after drinking old wine wishes for new; for he
say, ‘The old is good enough.’”

### Introduction

Our Lord receives an opportunity here to give the disciples a basic
understanding of a very complex subject: dispensation.

Here also is more evidence that John’s disciples are not exactly on the
cutting edge of theology, and in fact quite out of touch with Christ’s
kingdom ministry.

This passage forms the reply for John’s statement then, and Christ
definitely criticizes John’s disciples for taking his viewpoint of the
ministry transfer.

After the introductory details, the passage divides into three: the
bridegroom analogy; the patch analogy; and the wineskin analogy.

The introductory details: “Then the disciples of John came to Him,
saying,”Why do we and the Pharisees fast, but Your disciples do not
fast?" “And John’s disciples and the Pharisees were fasting; and they
came and said to Him,”Why do John’s disciples and the disciples of the
Pharisees fast, but Your disciples do not fast?" “And they said to
Him,”The disciples of John often fast and offer prayers; the disciples
of the Pharisees also do the same; but Yours eat and drink."

Matthew has just the disciples of John approaching Jesus with the
question of fasting; Mark has both John’s disciples and the Pharisees
asking; Luke has Christ’s disciples making the same inquiry.

Obviously, the reconciliation of the passage takes some work. Two
possibilities resolve the existence of contradictions.

The sequential explanation: Mark, Matthew, then Luke. In other words,
there was a fast that both Pharisees and John’s disciples had - and they
noticed that Christ and His disciples were not participating. First
John’s disciples, then the Pharisees came to Christ and asked their
question.

The separate incidents explanation. The three gospels writers remember
separate incidents, and record each as they some them.

Regardless, the Bible is inerrant, and so there is no contradiction
here. Pick the incident of your choice.

The ‘they’ of Luke’s gospel refers to the Pharisees and scribes only -
John’s disciples are not in view at all there. Luke also places this at
the banquet at Matthew’s house, where there was a big party with lots of
food and little fasting.

These individuals are both fasting. Fasting was a legitimate,
non-compulsory exercise in Israel. It is not forbidden, and it is not
mentioned in a negative light.

Moses fasted at Sinai while receiving the Law from God, Ex 34:28; Deut.
9:9. He did so again in mourning when he saw the golden calf, Deut.
9:17f.

At many times during the history of Israel, fasts were proclaimed at
times of national emergency or distress.

Judges 20:26, during the Gibeah disaster.

1 Sam 7:6, during the Mizpah disaster.

2 Chron 20:3, during the disaster that Jehoshaphat had with Moab.

Ezra 8:21-23, during the journey home from the exile.

Neh 1:4, at the discovery of the destroyed Jerusalem.

Esther 4:16, at the attempt of genocide against the Jews. g. Jer 36:9,
at a time of the destruction of Jerusalem.

A few times, Israel employed the fast as an act of penitence.

1 Kings 21:27, Ahab, when his evil and idolatry is exposed.

Neh 9:1, at ceremony of commemoration for the destruction of Judah.

They also implemented it as an accompaniment to earnest prayer, public
or private. 2 Sam 12:16, David, at the sickness of he and Bathsheba’s
child.

Fasting also often went alongside mourning.

2 Sam 1:12, David and his men at the death of Saul.

2 Sam 12:21, David, while his child was alive.

Fasting came to be on the annual schedule of religious events during and
after the exile, and all of these were related to the fall of the Jewish
client nation. They were a sort of remembrance of suffering kind of
fast.

But never, never in the history of Israel did God command His people to
fast. Lev 23:27-29: “On exactly the tenth day of this seventh month is
the day of atonement; it shall be a holy convocation for you, and you
shall humble your souls and present an offering by fire to the Lord.
Neither shall you do any work on this same day, for it is a day of
atonement, to make atonement on your behalf before the Lord your God. If
there is any person who will not humble himself on this same day, he
shall be cut off from the people.”

There have been many who equate the humbling of the soul with a literal
fast, but there is no reason whatsoever to take the passage this way.

The command to humble your souls is entirely self-sufficient, and is
another way of saying ‘believe the doctrine’.

Fasts were supposed to be a sort of Sabbath from food, wherein greater
concentration could be placed on God Himself, and especially during a
time of mourning or Divine discipline.

John the Baptist required his followers to observe the annual fasts of
the Jews.

Christ condemned hypocritical fasting, but did not condemn the practice
outright, Matt 6:16-18, “And whenever you fast, do not put on a gloomy
face as the hypocrites do, for they neglect their appearance in order to
be seen fasting by men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward in
full. But you, when you fast, anoint your head, and wash your face so
that you may not be seen fasting by men, but by your Father who is in
secret; and your Father who sees in secret will repay you.”

Although Christ is hard the Pharisees for their approbation lust, He
does not come down on fasting.

Instead, He assumes that people will continue to fast, and pushes them
all to do it in the right way.

There is a good reason why the Pharisees and disciples of John should
not fast at the present time: Christ is on the planet.

The first analogy, aimed at John the Baptist and his disciples. “And
Jesus said to them,”The attendants of the Bridegroom cannot mourn as
long as the bridegroom is with them, can they? But the days will come
when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will fast."

The attendants of the bridegroom are the disciples of John; the groom is
Christ Himself; and the bride is Israel.

Notice that Christ equates fasting and mourning. Here we have the
legitimate reason for fasting, which is a state of mourning.

Christ’s question to them is “Why are you mourning?” The truth which
lies under the question is, “This should be a time of celebration for
all of you”.

Christ has arrived, and He is offering to the kingdom to the bride -
this is a time for rejoicing. The millennium is upon them, why fast?

The use of the word fast in the last sentence shows an equivalency to
mourning. In fact, since Christ uses the two terms interchangeably we
can assume that He considered them as synonymous. Therefore, the subject
in the last sentence is about mourning.

This is the reason that Matthew’s gospel is so valuable - because he
remembered the force of Christ’s discourse and translated so that we
could have insight into the meaning.

Here also is another foreshadowing of Christ’s death. The disciples
would mourn then.

The bridegroom will be taken away from them through the ascension - Acts
1:9 records this event, and there Luke uses the same verb, APAIRO, to
describe the event. Under the ministry of God the Holy Spirit, Luke
interpreted the ascension as the fulfillment of Christ’s prediction.
Acts 1:9 is the only other place in the New Testament where this verb is
used, other than our three synoptic accounts of this event.

The verb APARTHE. points out some interesting things.

It is in the passive voice, revealing the nature of Christ’s passing. It
will be not of His choosing, but from the action of God.. The subject
receives the action of the verb.

The verb means to be taken away, not in any violent way, but just taken
away.

The verb is in the subjunctive mood, revealing that from the human
viewpoint, this event is only a potential event. Remember that the
church age is no set thing yet from the viewpoint of the Jewish client
nation. They may still choose Christ for their king. From the viewpoint
of the divine decree and divine foreknowledge, their rejection is set in
stone.

The second analogy, that of the patch. “But no one puts a patch of
unshrunk cloth on an old garment; for the patch pulls away from the
garment, and a worse tear results.” “No one sews a patch of unshrunk
cloth on an old garment; otherwise the patch pulls away from it, the new
from the old, and a worse tear results.” “And He was also telling them a
parable:”No one tears a piece from a new garment and puts it on an old
garment; otherwise he will both tear the new, and the piece from the new
will not match the old."

### Introduction to dispensations

Dispensation is a theological term which describes the Divine outline of
human history.

“A dispensation is a period of human history defined in terms of divine
revelation. According to the Bible, history is a sequence of divine
administrations. These consecutive eras reflect the unfolding of God’s
plan for mankind. They constitute the divine viewpoint of history and
the theological interpretation of history. The doctrine of dispensations
if the vehicles by which believers living at a specific time can orient
to God’s will, plan, and purpose form their lives.” (Thieme, p.3).

In human history, God gradually and progressively reveals His eternal
purpose for mankind. Although the revelation is gradual and progressive,
every generation has all that it needs to glorify God.

### Dispensational constants:

Since the creation of man, spiritual growth has come through faith
perception, and tested through adversity. This will always be the case,
Gen. 3:8, “Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the Lord God as
he was walking in the garden in the spiritual part of the day.” There
was a spiritual part of every day in the garden.

The truth has always been provided, although the form and mode of
communication of the truth is a variable.

The human spirit has always been provided as the frame of reference for
spiritual matters. It was there in the garden, and lost through the
fall.

In the church age, additional power is provided in the filling ministry
of God the Holy Spirit.

Since the creation of man, the character and sufficiency of God has
always been the issue for mankind. This will always be the case.

Since the creation of man, spiritual opportunity is always equal. So it
always will be.

Since the fall of man, salvation has always been by grace through belief
in Christ. So will it always be. Since Adam and Eve were in a state of
perfection, they had no need for salvation.

### Dispensational variables:

The form and agents of communication of the truth.

The form of communication varies widely, from direct communication from
God in the garden to oral tradition to written communication and ritual
communication.

The agent of communication is closely associated with the form, yet it
is distinct. Agents have varied from God to priests to prophets to
apostles to pastors.

The amount of truth, due to progressive revelation. Because the
revelation of the truth is progressive, and always builds on the body of
truth from preceding ages, each successive age has greater amount of the
truth than the preceding one. Sometimes the increases are dramatic,
sometimes they are less so.

### The availability of Divine Power

The ministry of God the Holy Spirit in the church age marks a fantastic
increase in the availability of divine power. In future ages, there will
be even more. In preceding ages, less so. This may be related to two
things: (1) The progressive degeneracy of man; (2) The progressive
amount of truth.

Corporate vs. Individual emphasis. In some dispensations, there is a
greater emphasis on the corporate than the individual. The age of Israel
is such an age. There is no dispensation that fails to recognize the
importance of the individual.

The individual emphasis harkens back to the individual decisions of
fallen angels to follow Satan and to reject the grace offer of God. The
corporate emphasis stresses the effect of individual decisions on the
whole.

Time and space relationship to Jesus Christ. The relationship in time of
a dispensation to the first and second advents has a direct effect on
the conditions of that dispensation, especially what is revealed in the
Word.

### Trends of Volition

Some dispensations seem to feature more positive volition than negative,
and of course vice-versa. Even within dispensations this holds true.

Representation of an age of angelic prehistory. Most dispensations
concentrate on the time of grace in angelic prehistory.

This analogy is the first of two which describe the change in conditions
in the age of Israel due to the presence of the Messiah.

The dispensation of Israel still continues during the life of Christ,
although it will end with the beginning of the church at Pentecost, 30
A.D. However, it really should not continue at all after the baptism of
our Lord. There are four reasons why the incarnation should be regarded
as a separate dispensation (from The Divine Outline of History, R. B.
Thieme, Jr., pp.49-50.

God revealed Himself to mankind as never before in history - in the
person of Christ. In the Scriptures the life of Christ is recorded four
times over, from four perspectives, unlike any other period in history.

God designed the incarnation of Jesus Christ to purchase salvation for
all mankind in every dispensation. From God’s viewpoint this
extraordinary period throws light across all of history and is not
hidden away as part of another dispensation. God’s design for the
incarnation of Christ also included an unprecedented system of power
that enabled the humanity of Christ to accomplish His mission.

Our Lord’s incarnation is a separate dispensation because it plays a
major role in defining other dispensation. One of its characteristics -
resurrection - becomes a distinguishing mark of the completion of each
subsequent dispensation.

This approximately thirty-three-year dispensation is like a cornerstone
or hinge that connects, yet divides, two very different dispensations.
Israel and the Church are different from one another because of the
Incarnation, which itself belongs to neither of these dispensations. We
will briefly present each of these four approaches.

The incarnation runs from the birth of Christ in B.C. 4 to the
resurrection and ascension of Christ in A.D. 30, a period of 33 years.

### The pre-baptism era

The presentation of the Word.

The total information and complexity of the Word remains the same as in
the last era. The means of communication also remains the same. Although
the living Word was now in His human body, his time of teaching had not
yet come. Although John the Baptist had a special ministry in preparing
the way for Christ, he is a prophet, and no more, Jn 1:6-8, “There came
a man who was sent from God; his name was John. He came as a witness to
testify concerning that light, so that through him all men might
believe. He himself was not the light; he came only as a witness to the
light.”

### The current phase of the angelic conflict

The Pre-baptism era of the life of Christ marked the beginning of the
rebuttal phase of the angelic conflict. The intensity of the conflict
became much greater. The scope of the conflict was focused on the person
of Jesus Christ.

There was a great deal of angelic protection for the person of Jesus
Christ, especially in His early years, Mt 2:13-18 (read). The conflict
continued in the lives of other human beings, but the great focus was on
Christ Himself.

This era had several purposes within the conflict.

The continuation of the age of Israel, and the era of Divine Discipline,
which overlapped the present dispensation (explain).

Jesus Christ lived the perfect life of a believer under the ritual
system of the age of Israel, Mt 5:17, “Do not think that I have come to
abolish the Law or the prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to
fulfill them.”

He proved that it could be done as the last one to take the witness
stand under the ritual plan of God.

He began the transition to the church age and the rebuttal phase of the
trial.

He was therefore the perfect cornerstone between the two dispensations,
Mt 21:42; Mk 12:10; Lk 20:17; Acts 4:11; Eph 2:20; 1 Pet 2:6,7.

### The post-baptism era

Note: At His baptism, Our Lord received the filling ministry of the Holy
Spirit, and thus began His earthly ministry, and the prototype Christian
life.

### The presentation of the Word

The total information revealed took a large step forward at the
revelation of the living Word in the baptism of Christ. The complexity
of the information stayed relatively low. The means of communication
took some new turns as well.

The Word was for the very first time communication in a person, that is,
Jesus Christ. Our Lord Himself communicated through Word and deed. He
taught individuals, small groups, and large crowds. He also taught by
the example of His own life. The availability of Divine power.

The general populace had the same power as the preceding eras. Jesus
Christ received the full-time filling of the Spirit for the first time
in History.

Through it He received all of the spiritual gifts that He needed to
establish the Christian way of life. Included were at least miracles,
healing, knowledge, prophecy, pastor-teacher, and faith. Through it He
was empowered to execute perfectly the prototype Christian life in the
protocol plan of God. Because of it He could remain impeccable and
accomplish what He needed to without using His own omnipotence. The
current phase of the angelic conflict.

Although the scope of the angelic conflict remained the same, this was
perhaps the most intense time in history, Mt 4:1-12; Lk 4:1-12 (read).

The level of chaos, violence, and suffering isn’t always an accurate
measuring device for the intensity of the spiritual conflict.

In this era, Satan and Jesus Christ underwent an incredibly intense
spiritual contest, and our Lord was the winner. The purpose of this era
was to establish the new way of spiritual life for Church age believers,
and to accomplish the salvation of mankind.

In His life, Our Lord became the first witness of the rebuttal phase of
the trial, and underwent a severe cross examination by the devil. It was
also necessary for Him to die a substitutionary spiritual death on the
cross, so that our salvation might be made available. In the rebuttal
phase, every mature believer is an example of what Satan and the fallen
angels could have had if they would have accepted the grace offer of
God. In Christ, Satan had an example of what He could have had if he had
never sinned in the first place. Whereas Adam became an example of the
fall of Satan, Our Lord was an example of Satan without the fall, 1Cor
15:45-49. The life of Christ after His baptism begins a string of
witnesses which bring individual recrimination against the fallen
angels.

Jesus Christ is the patch of new cloth; the dispensation of Israel is
the old garment. The one central truth that is communicated by this
parable and the next is that of unsuitability.

The new cloth does not fit with the old garment.

The old garment is unsuitable for the new patch; so the conditions of
the dispensation of Israel are unsuited for the coming of Christ.

The Pharisees were fasting as a part of their ritual system. John’s
disciples were fasting as a part of his ministry. Both are unsuited for
the dispensation of the incarnation. We have seen that fasting was
related to mourning. However, mourning was particularly unsuited to the
celebratory nature of Christ’s appearance and ministry.

Both Matthew and Mark use the word PLEROMA for what we have as ‘new’.
Actually PLEROMA is a word which means fullness. The new patch is full,
like a sponge, but later it will be empty and smaller. Thus, the
tearing. Christ certainly was the fullness of God in a human being, and
could not be coupled with a dispensation that is all about compensation
for sin.

The second parable is much the same as the first: it has as its one
central truth the idea of unsuitability.

This time, Christ is the new wine, and the old wineskin is the
dispensation of Israel, and more specifically, the idea of fasting.

The difference here is that the unsuitability lies in the idea of
expansion instead of shrinking. The new wine expands, whereas the new
patch of cloth shrinks.

In both cases, Christ and the dispensation of the incarnation are the
new things, and the dispensation of Israel and fasting are the old
things. In both cases, the old is unsuitable to the new, and Christ
urges them to bring new to the new. The new is a new dispensation.

In essence, Christ is telling them that their dispensation, with its
ritual form of teaching, is outdated, and in fact they should be letting
it pass.

The way to let that dispensation to pass is to take hold of the new one,
and its distinctions, or dispensational variables.

The followers of John the Baptist should be the first ones on the case,
because they were supposed to “be prepared” for the coming of the Lord.
How could they be prepared through legalism? How through clinging to the
former dispensation, now obviously past?

Nor do the Pharisees have an excuse.

John Chapter 5
--------------

Jerusalem
---------

**John 5:1**, “After these things there was a feast of the Jews, and
Jesus went up to Jerusalem”

Chronology.

This is the spring of 27 A.D., the second Passover during Christ’s
ministry. This feast is not tabernacles, although many assert it to be.

The great day of atonement was the day of fasting mentioned by the
disciples of John and the Pharisees.

Jerusalem was a few days’ journey from Galilee, and so it would have
been difficult to make it while the feast was still going.

The phrase META TAUTA - “after these things” is an allusion to what has
just gone previously in his gospel, but was some time before if this is
the feast of Tabernacles.

The previous event at the end of John chapter four is the healing of the
royal man’s son. This in turn was only a few days after the incident
with the Samaritan woman at the well. And that event just when Christ
was entering Galilee and starting up His ministry there.

In a nutshell, META TAUTA would encompass about one year in time! This
stretches the meaning of the phrase a little too far.

The apostles made the connection between the feast of tabernacles and
the transfiguration of Jesus Christ.

Read Mark 9:1-8.

The transfiguration was a preview of the glorification of Jesus Christ
at the second advent.

Read Rev. 19:11-16.

Our Lord testified to this very thing.

Read John 7:2-8.

If Christ would not go up to this feast the next year, then why the year
previous.

Conclusion: this cannot be the feast of tabernacles.

The handicapped in ancient Israel were cared for, but it was just about
a guarantee that one would live in poverty for all his life.

**John 5:2-5**, “Now there is in Jerusalem by the sheep gate a pool,
which is nicknamed in Hebrew Bethzatha, having five porticoes. In these
lay a multitude of those who were sick, blind, lame, and withered. And a
certain man was there, who had been thirty-eight years in his sickness.”

The sheep gate is a gate that opens to the North side of the temple
area, but not the temple itself.

About two hundred yards to the North from this gate there are two
man-made pools, standing next to each other in north-south orientation.

John’s account mentions only one pool, that one by the name of
Bethzatha.

The other name possibilities(Bethesda, Belzetha, etc.) exist because of
some confusing place names in the area, but must be discounted on the
basis of the weakness of their manuscripts.

This confusion exists because Herod the great, the man who had the pools
built a few years before Christ’s birth, called the complex the ‘house
of mercy’, or, Bethesda. And, nearby, there was a suburb called Bezatha.
The two place names collided and over the years they became one -
‘Beth-zatha’.

The two pools issue from the same underground spring, and so were often
lumped together. Beth-zatha was the name for the complex. Even we say we
are going down to the neighborhood pool, when there may be a baby pool
or a lap pool in addition to the main one.

The word for ‘called’ is EPILEGOMENE, which means to place one word on
top of another, or to assign a nickname. Thus we know that Bethzatha is
a nickname and not its proper name.

This pool complex had five porticoes. A portico is a porch that has a
roof supported by columns. This was really a magnificent looking area,
typical of Solomon’s building program.

The story about the angel stirring up the waters is certainly not
included in the original manuscript of John’s writing.

The earliest manuscript that contains the angel story is from the fifth
century; the earliest that omits it from around 200. Case settled.

What the inclusion of the angel story does is attempt to provide a
rationale for why so many of the sick, blind, lame, and withered went
there, and why they wanted so much to go into the waters.

This place was a sort of Lourdes of the ancient world. A local legend,
totally untrue, had an angel stirring up the waters and giving healing
to any who could get there while the water roiled. What a terrible false
hope these people had! Many of them would have come just for the feast,
and gone to this place as a special pilgrimage. Perhaps the rumor that
Christ was near stirred up the frenzy of interest even more.

The roiling of the waters was a pretty bad tease. All of the scrambling
to get into the pools must have been a horrifying spectacle.

Thirty eight years is a really long time to be ill! There is hope and
hopeless hope. How he must have rationalized his presence there. How he
must have hoped a hopeless hope to be healed. The man’s illness left him
in an incapacitated state - he did not have the physical capability to
reached the roiling of the pool.

**John 5:6-9,**“When Jesus saw him lying there, and knew that he had
already been a long time in that condition, He said to him,”Do you wish
to get well?" The sick man answered Him, “Sir, I have no man to cast me
into the pool whenever the water is stirred up. But while I myself am
coming, another goes down before me.” Jesus said to him, “Arise, take up
your pallet, and walk.” And immediately the man became well, and took up
his pallet and began to walk. Now it was the Sabbath on that day."

John reveals Christ’s motivation through the statement, “[Christ] knew
that he had already been a long time in that condition.”

Christ’s offer comes from His compassion. Christ had seen thousands and
thousands of the sick and lame, and even many of them were present at
this scene, but this man is among the worst.

Christ did not come to heal every sick or lame person in the world. It
is a point of fact that He did not.

He did choose this man out of compassion. He was the most pitiful of the
bunch at the pool.

Christ uses the word HUGIE.S to define the man’s desire. It denotes
physical soundness or wholeness. It portrays the absence of disease or
defect. Paul uses this for sound doctrine in Titus 2:8.

Also remarkable is that the poor man had no one to help him. There is no
compassion in Israel.

Healing this man will be a sign that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, and
especially the suffering Messiah. How appropriate then that this healing
occurs at the Passover feast, which is a ritual that teaches the same
principle.

A typical misunderstanding occurs. Christ asks the man if he wishes to
get well, and the man assumes that Christ speaks of the healing powers
of the waters.

The sick man has no idea whatsoever as to the identity of Christ. If he
had, then he would have been on to what Christ was offering.

Remember also that Christ has been away in Galilee for a year or so, and
that he did not announce His return to Jerusalem. And this: if this man
had no one to put him in this pool, then who would have carried him to
Galilee and Christ.

But Christ had to come here, because this man was positive, and had no
way to physically come to Christ.

The man says, “Sir, I have no man to cast me into the pool whenever the
water is stirred up. But while I myself am coming, another goes down
before me.”

The man addresses Christ respectfully with the appellation KURIE. This
is the ‘sir’ of the koine Greek. It does not indicate that he knew
Christ’s true nature. Remember this from the woman at the well? She used
the same form of address.

The use of HOTAN, ‘whenever’ indicates that the water is stirred up on
random occasions.

TARASSO describes the stirring up of the waters. The sick man uses the
passive voice, which most likely indicates his belief that the stirring
up does not come from a natural source. Note the difference: “The water
stirred…” “The water was stirred by the angel…”

The man also emphasizes that he is alone in this endeavor by the
intensive use of the personal pronoun EGO combined with the verb
ERCHOMAI. Together, these are translated, “I myself.”

This is a most pitiful plea.

“Jesus said to him,”Arise, take up your pallet, and walk around." And
immediately the man became well, and took up his pallet and began to
walk around. Now it was the Sabbath on that day."

Not only does Christ command the sick man to get up and walk, but also
to take up his pallet.

The KRABATTOS was a small portable bed, perhaps in the form of a
mattress-stretcher combination. The same word was employed by the
synoptic writers for the man who was lowered through the roof to Jesus.
That mattress was obviously on some kind of frame, and rigid.

While the pallet used to carry him, now he carries the pallet. Christ’s
command is very appropriate, and designed to bring a great demonstration
of the power of God.

The verb for walk is PERIPATEO, and it means literally to ‘walk around’.

The idea is definitely that of demonstration.

Imagine the scene: all those scrambling madly to get into the waters
whenever they stir, a pitiful, wild, weird freak show. Does the cure
work immediately, or does it take time? Do I have to be where the water
stirs, or just in the pool anywhere when it does stir? How can you tell
the difference between the stirring of the angel, and the wind. Or worse
yet, the stirring of the angel and all the splashing and confusion as
the scramble occurs.

And then, of all things, one of their number, clearly outside of the
pool, arises and begins to walk around with his pallet in hand.

There is a hushed silence… amazement… “HEY IT’S THE SABBATH! YOU CAN’T
DO THAT ON THE SABBATH! ALERT! ALARM! SABBATH BREAKER! SABBATH BREAKER!”

John puts a shadow on this happy moment by mentioning that it was the
Sabbath. Surely this man knew it was the Sabbath, but how could he
disobey the one who had healed his illness of thirty eight years?

**John 5:10-13**, “Therefore the Jews were saying to him who was
cured,”It is the Sabbath, and it is not permissible for you to carry
your pallet." But he answered them, “He who made me well was the one who
said to me,”Take up your pallet and walk." They asked him, “Who is the
man who said to you,”Take up your pallet and walk?" But he who was
healed did not know who it was; for Jesus had slipped away while there
was a crowd in that place."

The Jews are angry because of this Sabbath violation - notice how little
true compassion they have - they could care less about the man’s medical
history, and the hopelessness that he experienced during that thirty
eight year illness.

The Jews have forgotten the true meaning of the Sabbath, which is
concentration on God and His work. Surely they should understand this
magnificent healing as a work of God, and worship Him for it.

Not only have they forgotten the true meaning of the Sabbath, but they
have also distorted it, replacing it with cheap legalism and a multitude
of rules. Let’s look at the Mosaic rule concerning the Sabbath…

Sabbath Review
--------------

**Gen. 1:31-2:3**, “And God saw all that He had made, and behold, it was
very good. And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.
Thus the heavens and the earth were completed, and all their hosts. And
by the seventh day God completed His work which He had done; and he
rested on the seventh day and sanctified it, because in it He”sabbathed"
from all His work which God had created and made."

God does not tire.

God can do an infinite amount of work and still concentrate and
appreciate what He has done.

But God stopped on this occasion to demonstrate to man his need for
concentration on God.

It is true that man needs physical rest; but the rest for the soul comes
from a relationship with God, and that is the nature of the Sabbath.

Rhetorical question: if you only needed rest once a week, then why do
you sleep every day? Isn’t sleep rest?

One day a week of rest has no magical effect on the body, nor is this
indicated anywhere in the Bible. There is no verse that says if you fail
to rest one day a week you will die young!

**Exodus 20:8-11**, “Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days
you shall labor and do all your work, but the seventh day is a Sabbath
of the Lord your God; in it you shall not do any work, you or your son
or your daughter, your male or your female servant or your cattle or
your sojourner who stays with you. For in six days the Lord made the
heavens and the earth, the sea and all that is in them, and rested on
the seventh day; therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and made it
holy.”

**Deut 5:15**: “And you shall remember that you were a slave in the land
of Egypt, and the Lord your God brought you out of there by a mighty
hand and by an outstretched arm; therefore the Lord your God commanded
you to observe the Sabbath.”

Also significant is the placement of this commandment. It follows after
three relationship commandments:

You shall have no other Gods before Me.

You shall no make for yourself an idol, or any likeness of what is in
heaven above or on the earth beneath or in the water under the earth.
You shall not worship them or serve them; for I, the Lord your God, am a
jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children, on
the third and the fourth generations of those who hate Me, but showing
lovingkindness to thousands, to those who love Me and keep My
commandments.

You shall not take the name of the Lord your God in vain, for the Lord
will not leave him unpunished who takes His name in vain.

The interpretation of the Sabbath as a period of concentration on God is
the only interpretation compatible with the greatest commandment, Deut
6:5.

Read Joshua 21:43-22:6.

The Jews occupied the promised land, and immediately entered into the
rest of God. Here for the first time the Sabbath is equated with
spiritual maturity, and the feast of tabernacles.

Observe that Joshua tells his people that they have kept all that the
Lord commanded, and that this was the prerequisite for their entrance to
the blessing of the promised land. God kept every promise about it.

He also warns them to continue in this direction - “to love the Lord
your God”

Notice that in the commandment it is called the Sabbath of God. This is
the possessive sense here - the Sabbath that belongs to God; the one you
should give to Him.

Exodus 23:12, “Six days you are to do your work, but on the seventh day
you shall cease from labor in order that your ox and your donkey may
rest, and the son of your female slave, as well as your stranger, may
refresh themselves.”

Here is the more practical side of the Sabbath - but see that the
Sabbath is for the animals and slaves and visitors at your house.

The refreshment seems to be of a physical nature here.

This physical command is repeated in Exodus 34:21, “You shall work six
days, but on the seventh day you shall rest; even during plowing time
and harvest you shall rest.”

A Sabbath could be a whole week, Lev 23:39, the feast of Tabernacles.
Here the connection with concentration on God is made the more strong.

A Sabbath could be a whole year, Lev 25:2,4,6.

Exodus 16:22-30 is a reminder that the Lord provides logistics so that
you can concentrate on Him.

If you are striving to get ahead, and make logistics a priority above
God, then you are under the mistaken assumption that God cannot provide
for you.

If you make recreation a priority above God, then you are under the
mistaken impression that God cannot refresh you in the allotted time.

Ezekiel 20:12,20 place a seal on the meaning of the Sabbath: “And also I
gave them My Sabbaths to be a sign between me and them, that they might
know that I am the Lord who sanctifies them.”

The purpose of the Sabbath is to know God, the God who sanctifies them.

Interestingly enough, we are sanctified by knowing God.

There is one day a week when the people know God, and that is what
sanctifies them.

Aside from the prohibition of work, there is very little specific about
the commandment. The real question about this commandment is whether you
concentrate on God during this period.

Perhaps Isaiah 40:27-31 summarizes the benefit of the true Sabbath best:
“Why do you say, O Jacob, and assert, O Israel,”My way is hidden from
the Lord, and the justice due me escapes the notice of my God“? Do you
not know? Have you not heard? The Everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator
of the ends of the earth does not become weary or tired. His
understanding is inscrutable. He gives strength to the weary, and to him
who lacks might He increases power. Though youths grow weary and tired,
and vigorous young men stumble badly, yet those who wait for the Lord
will gain new strength; they will mount up with wings like eagles, they
will run and not get tired, they will walk and not become weary.”

Read Hebrews 3:7-4:13.

This long passage is about the Sabbath rest of Joshua, which is
spiritual maturity.

You can only enter the Sabbath rest of God through belief in Jesus
Christ.

Unbelief prevents you from ever knowing this wonderful rest.

The writer of Hebrews makes a big point out of the present time. Again
and again he makes the assertion that there is no day like today to
enter into the Sabbath rest of God (although you cannot reach maturity
in a day, you can get on the trail that leads to it).

The word of God is the means of entering the Sabbath rest - it is the
way to maturity.

When the Pharisees accuse the sick man of violating the Sabbath, he says
that he was just following orders from the one who made him well,
HUGIE.S, physically well. He is not spiritually well just yet.

But the sick man only knows that he is well. He does not know who made
him that way.

**John 5:14-16**, “Afterward Jesus found him in the temple, and said to
him,”Behold, you have become well; sin no longer, so that nothing worse
may befall you." The man went away, and reported to the Jews that it was
Jesus who had made him well. And for this reason the Jews were
persecuting Jesus, because He was doing these things on the Sabbath."

Christ was in the temple, for His observation of the Passover
proceedings. What thoughts He must have had.

The man is physically well, but there is in him a persistence of sin.
There is little or no evidence of his conversion to this point, and our
Lord makes it clear that he is at this moment not right with God.

Handicaps are neither spiritual liabilities nor spiritual assets.
Volition runs the same in the handicapped as in all others.

The prohibition against sinning is quite interesting:

Christ says, “ME.KETI HAMARTANE”. The verb HAMARTANE is in the
imperative mood, so this is a command. ME.KETI is a temporal adverb
which denotes the cessation of an action. This really does mean “sin no
longer”, as in never again.

But how can Christ tell this to someone whom He knows will sin? Christ
has to be aware of the realities of the sin nature. C. Really, this
would be a legitimate command to a believer - all of us are commanded to
restrain from sin.

However, there is a very similar turn of the phrase in Jeremiah 31:34,
and it would be a good idea to go there and examine its context.

The formerly sick man reported, ANAGGELO to the Jews that it was Jesus
who had made him well. This Greek word holds only a negative connotation
here. It may be taken as “tattled”, or just “reported”, but either way
it is the voluntary nature of the act that really stinks. This man chose
to report to the Jews what could only turn out wrong.

The Jews employed this information in persecution - DIOKO means to
doggedly pursue someone for the purpose of doing them harm.

The stated reason for the persecution is Christ’s violation of the
Pharasaic rules of the Sabbath. He definitely broke their Sabbath, but
not the real one. Remember, Christ was the fulfillment of the Law; He
could never have broken the real Sabbath.

**John 5:17-18,** “But He answered them,”My Father is working until now,
and I Myself am working." For this cause therefore the Jews were seeking
all the more to kill Him, because He not only was breaking the Sabbath,
but also was calling God His own Father, making Himself equal with God."

The two verbs translated “working” are both the same, ERGAZOMAI. They
are the present middle indicatives, indicating ongoing, non-stop work to
the indefinite future.

The purpose of these verbs is to answer the assertion that we rest
because God rested. The essence of the Sabbath is not the cessation of
work, but concentration on God.

But Christ’s works and God’s works should be the objects of
concentration, and they certainly are not a violation of the Moses’
Sabbath.

Christ uses the personal pronoun EGO in order to emphasize His own work
- not in contrast to that of the Father’s, but in concert.

So two things here would get the attention of the Pharisees:

That Christ called God His Father.

That Christ considered His work equivalent with that of the Father’s.

As a result, the Jews were seeking all the more to kill him.

The more bold Christ became, the more the Jews wanted to kill Him; the
more that Christ revealed about the plan of God in Him, the more the
Jews wanted to kill Him; the more that Christ set Himself up as a
substituted for them, the more the Jews wanted to kill Him.

So this was not only persecution, but deadly persecution.

Even two years before the death of Christ, the conspiracy to kill Him
gained great strength.

Christ spoke the truth - He is a part of the trinity. God is three
persons in one Godhead.

The first person of the Trinity is God the Father. The second person of
the Trinity is God the Son. The third person of the Trinity is God the
Holy Spirit.

The three persons of the trinity possess identical essence in one being.

This divine being is tripersonal, having three distinct persons which
are autonomous from one another in soul function.

This distinction in persons is more than just one God showing different
facets or modes of His one person.

Christ is a part of the trinity even though His is in the flesh.

Definition: “In the person of the incarnate Christ are two natures,
inseparably united without mixture or loss of separate identity, without
loss or transfer of properties or attributes, the union being both
personal and eternal from the moment of the virgin birth.”

The standard operating procedure for the hypostatic union was to be
something called Kenosis, Phil 2:5-8, “Your attitude should be the same
as that of Christ Jesus: Who, being in very nature God, did not consider
equality with God something to be grasped, but made himself nothing,
taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness. And
being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself and became
obedient to death– even death on a cross!”

During the incarnation our Lord voluntarily restricted the independent
use of the divine capabilities. Furthermore, the expression of His
character was restricted to what He had developed in His humanity, and
not what He inherently had as deity.

He did this in compliance with the Father’s plan for His time on planet
earth.

Christ voluntarily became man, and with that restricted His deity to His
humanity.

During the incarnation Jesus Christ never once exercised the independent
use of His own Divine capabilities, either to benefit Himself, to
provide for Himself, or to glorify Himself, Mt 4:1-12; Lk 4:1-12.

Voluntary restriction does not mean that those things went away, but
that they were simply not used. He was still omniscient, omnipotent,
omnipresent, love, etc.

Christ’s divine capabilities and character traits were ready and
available for His use at all times, but He chose not to use them.

John 5:19-47 Outline
--------------------

### The Humility of the Son, vv.19-21

His humility in earthly doings, “19 Jesus therefore answered and was
saying to them,”Truly, truly, I say to you, the Son can do nothing from
Himself, unless it is something he sees the Father doing; for whatever
the Father does, these things the Son also likewise does."

Now here is the definition of Christ’s humility to the Father, and from
Christ’s own lips.

Christ does exactly what the Father does. He is the exact imitation of
the integrity of God.

This statement, during the incarnation, is restricted to the character
of God, and it stands as a great example for all of us.

Also in this statement is a strong reinforcement of the doctrine of
kenosis.

The Son observes the Father through His study of the Old Testament.
Christ definitely does not “go visit” the Father when no one is looking.
Christ’s observations are limited to what anyone else has during that
time.

God does what He does from His perfection. Christ does what He does from
God’s perfection. For what Christ does, He does as a man.

What Christ says here to the Pharisees is really stunning: that he is
both equal to the Father, and to them. Christ is limited by kenosis to
the human condition.

His humility in future doings,“20 For the Father loves the Son and shows
to Him all things which He Himself does and He will show Him greater
works than these, so that you yourselves might marvel.”

The Father loves the Son

There is equal love in the Godhead among all members. The Father loves
the Son’s humanity as well.

This is my Son, whom I love; in whom I am well-pleased. The Son had
lived the perfect life up to this time, and He is the one human being
who deserves the true personal love of the Father.

The Father shows the Son all things which He himself does.

The showing depends on the power of the Holy Spirit, but neither is this
outside of the access of the rest of the human race. In order to be
truly effective as savior and prototype, Christ had to have only what
was available to other believers of His time. Therefore, this revelation
of God is what was already revealed to everyone, and something that was
in plain sight. It also eliminates excuses, and removes anti-grace
thinking.

The greater works, those which would cause even the Pharisees to marvel,
are future, and things which have yet to be done.

Christ had already done healings and miracles - and such things had been
done in the Old Testament.

But there had been no resurrection, nor yet the second coming and
millennial rule. These are the works to which Christ refers.

The greater works does not refer to church age mystery doctrine, because
Christ did not reveal the church, or even hint at the church until the
last week of His life.

Therefore, these things must be those already associated with Israel.

His humility in life making,“21 For just as the Father raises the dead
and makes them alive, even so the Son also makes alive whom He wishes.”

God the Father gave life in a limited sense in the dispensations before
Christ. He placed their souls into interim bodies, and transferred them
either to torments or paradise. And also he creates the soul in the
first place and puts it into the human body.

This function is portrayed as occurring just then, as Christ spoke. God
still held this role.

Jesus Christ had apparently already resuscitated a number of people as a
kingdom sign. Christ would continue to do this, in order to point to His
own resurrection, and the future resurrections of mankind.

Christ specifically points out that His willpower is involved. This
works in conjunction with His spiritual gift. Our willpower works the
same way with our gifts.

### The Equality and Superiority of the Son, vv.22-30.

His authority to judge, “22 For not even the Father judges anyone, but
He has given all judgment to the Son.”

The Son will judge on several different occasions.

Judgement of our sins on the cross.

The self-judgement of our sins in time through confession.

The Judgment Seat of Christ, the evaluation of all Church Age believers.

The baptism of fire, which is the judgment of all unbelievers of the
tribulation, both Jew and Gentile, Mt 25:31-46; Ezek 20:33-48.

The evaluation of all tribulational believers, both Jew and Gentile, Mt
25:31-46; Dan 12:2-3.

At the great white throne, there are three categories of judgments.

The judgment of believers.

All believers who lived before the incarnation, both Jew and Gentile,
are judged at this time.

All Millennial believers are judged at this time.

The judgment of unbelievers. All unbelievers in history, except those of
the tribulation, are judged at this time. Mt 25:31-46, Ezek 20:32-38,
Rev 20:7-10.

The judgment of all fallen angels at the end of the Millennium. Their
sentence was passed before time began, but its execution is not carried
out until the end of human history.

The purpose of His authority, “23 So that all might honor the Son just
as they honor the Father. The one who does not honor the Son does not
honor the Father Who sent Him.”

The purpose particle introduces the purpose for the authority of Christ
in judgment.

God gave Christ the authority to judge so that the human race would give
Him equal honor.

The honor that Christ should receive comes from the dual sacrifice of
His kenosis, Phil 2:5-8.

This honor is a mental attitude of appreciation for the sacrifice and
integrity of another.

There is honor for the Father from the Old Testament dispensations.

The honor is an option, for it is in the potential subjunctive mood.

The application of man related to Christ’s authority, “24 Truly truly I
say to you that the one who listens to My word and believes in the one
who sent me has eternal life and does not come into judgment, but has
passed out of death into life.”

Since Christ has authority to judge and to give life, it behooves all
men to listen to the word of Christ and believe in the one who sent Him.

Belief in Christ negates the judgment which rightfully should come to
one in total depravity.

Every human being is born into a state of total depravity, characterized
by total separation from God due to Adam’s original sin, and total
helplessness to do anything about it. This is a state of judgment!

If you refuse to believe in Christ, you are left in that state of
judgment; if you believe in Christ you are removed from that state of
judgment and placed into union with Christ.

The resurrection related to Christ, “25 Truly truly I say to you that
the hour is coming and now is when the dead will hear the voice of the
Son of God - and the ones who hear will live.”

This event is in the present - it is really a double entendre. First, is
when someone listens to the voice of the Son of God, and believes what
he has to say. This person, who begins in a status of spiritual death,
that is, total depravity, will live.

The future life is when that person will be resurrected unto life. Thus,
resurrection is in view here as well.

The explanation of the power to resurrect, “26 For just as the Father
has life in Himself, so also He gave to the Son to have life in
Himself.”

This is a restatement of the previous statement about the ability to
give life. But it does have its own twist.

Notice here that the attribute of life itself is applied to Christ.

The life here is eternal life, and it implies quality as well as
infinity.

For us, the meaning is vitality.

Vitality in the gospel of John.

Vitality is expressive Christianity.

The format for vitality is prayer.

The contents of vitality are worship, observation, supplication,
confession, dependence, and character.

The explanation of the authority to judge, “27 And He gave authority to
Him to make judgment, because He is the Son of Man.”

Hand in hand with the authority to give life is the authority to judge.

The two represent the only possibilities for your eternal fate.

A narration of the resurrection and judgment, " 28 Do not marvel at
this; because the hour is coming in which everyone who is in the tombs
will hear His voice, 29 and they will come out, the ones who did
[divine] good unto a resurrection of life, but those who practiced human
good unto a resurrection of judgment."

The hour is coming - this represents the eminence of divine judgment.
The word denotes a short span of time between the present and the
future.

When the time is past, it will seem only a short time.

Everyone who is in the tombs - obviously, those who are dead. This does
not seem a reference to the incident at the death of Christ, Matt
27:52-53, “and the tombs were opened; and many bodies of the saints who
had fallen asleep were raised; and coming out of the tombs after His
resurrection they entered the holy city and appeared to many.”

Those in the tombs at Christ’s death are resuscitated - their old nasty
decayed human bodies are raised.

However, verse 29 clearly states this passage as a resurrection at the
end of time.

Furthermore, here it is PANTES , everyone who is in the tombs; in
Matthew it is POLLA, “many”.

Will hear His voice - now this is the change from verse 25, and is
really the completion of it. If you hear His voice now, you will hear it
later, and that’s good.

HOI TA AGAPA POIESANTES, “the ones who did the intrinsic good”.

The participle is in the aorist tense, and so it reveals action that
occurs before the main verb. It describes the action of those who
believed in Christ during the span of their lives on earth.

The aorist participle also denotes that the action occurred in one
moment of time - this is a single act of good.

The definite article and noun portray a single act of intrinsic good,
and one which is known by the listeners. It is only belief in Christ.

The result is a resurrection unto life, eternal life, that is.

HOI TA PHAULA PRAXANTES “The ones who practiced the human good.”

This is really descriptive! The aorist participle describes past time,
but here the meaning of the verb overrules the tense of the participle
in the kind of action. The verb pra/ssw is “practice”, and therefore
indicates action over a lifetime.

The noun reveals anything worthless or out of bounds. It summarizes all
the acts of human good which an unbeliever accumulates over a lifetime.

This person is also resurrected, but unto judgment - the harsh judgment
into the lake of fire, which occurs at the great white throne.

The equity of Christ’s judgment, “30 I am not able to do anything from
Myself; I judge just as I hear, and My judgment is just, because I do
not seek my own will, but the will of the One who sent Me.”

Christ follows the will of the Father in judgment.

Christ desires to please God in all of His judgments.

None of the judgments of Christ attempt to please man; they only attempt
to please God. This is what makes all of His judgments perfectly fair.

To please man is to fall into the morass of relativity. There is no
fairness in relativity.

### The Testimony about the Son, vv.31-37

The invalidity of self-testimony, “31 If I testify about Myself, My
testimony is not true;”

Christ is speaking to the Pharisees here. Remember that! He therefore
switches over to a very objective mode in testimony about Himself.

When Christ says, “not true”. What He means is not true to the
Pharisees. Of course His testimony is true! It is just that He knows
that the Pharisees will not trust His self-testimony.

The validity of outside testimony & the first outside witness to Christ,
“32 There is another who testifies about me, and I know that the
testimony which He testifies about Me is true.”

Outside testimony is more valid for the Pharisees. He would have their
attention by now.

Although some manuscripts have the more logical “you know”, they are
late and unreliable.

So, there is an outside witness, and his testimony is true. The
Pharisees would be asking themselves who this might be.

The first witness: John the Baptist, “33 You have sent to John, and he
has testified the truth.”

Remember, the Pharisees sent a fact finding team to John, John 1:19-28.
At that time, John told them about Christ. He made the issue very clear.

Christ uses the intensive form of the personal pronoun “you”. He wants
to really emphasize that the Pharisees were concerned enough about John
ministry to find out more about Him.

When John made the issue so clear, it was the truth.

Christ’s purpose in citing these witnesses, “34 But I did not receive
the testimony from man, but I speak these things so that you might be
saved.”

Christ here reveals His pure motive in providing testimony. He wants the
very best for the Pharisees, which is for them to be saved through
belief in Him.

Christ did not receive the testimony from man. This means that Christ is
pointing out that He received a greater testimonial than just human. He
received one from God the Father Himself at His baptism.

Although I have not included it in my outline, this is really the second
witness to Christ.

John’s testimony and the Pharisees’ former acceptance of it, “35 He
[John the Baptist] was the lamp that was burning and shining and you
wanted to rejoice for a short time in his light.”

Notice the past tense HEN. Although John was the lamp that was burning
and shining, Christ makes it clear that this is no longer the case.

In fact, John has allied with the Pharisees now, and has become the
enemy of Christ.

John was the lamp… the lamp that the Pharisees would remember would be
the lampstand in the holy place of the tabernacle and temple. It is the
lamp which represents the ministry of God the Holy Spirit.

John in his ministry shed light on the Old Testament. He was like the
Spirit in that regard. In fact, the Spirit worked alongside the ministry
of John.

For a short time the Pharisees wanted to rejoice in the light of John’s
ministry. At first they had a few shreds of positive volition. That time
is clearly past.

Summary: we now have two witnesses - John the Baptist and God the
Father.

The second witness: the works of Christ, “36 But I have a greater
witness than John; for the works which the Father gave Me so that I
might finish them, the very works which I do, testify about Me that the
Father sent Me.”

So the works of Christ also testify about Him - that He is the Son of
God.

Christ did the following works through the ministry of God the Holy
Spirit.

Miracles.

Healings.

Demon Exorcisms.

Remember, these great things are done through the spiritual gifts and
the power of the Spirit, and certainly not through his own deity.

These same works are given by the Father, so that they might be
fulfilled or finished by Christ.

Step by step Christ fulfills Old Testament prophecy.

Through Old Testament wisdom Christ does the works which are given by
the Father.

By the guidance of the Spirit Christ knows when to do what. The Spirit
even guides when we are not sure or flat out do not know.

Eph 2:10, “For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good
works, which God prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them.”

Christ does miracles, healings, and exorcisms, and nobody else does.
Doesn’t that point to His being the messiah?

The third witness: the Father, “37 And the Father who sent Me, has
testified about Me. You have neither heard His voice, nor seen His
form,”

Christ has already alluded to this witness.

The Father testified about Christ at His baptism.

But the Old Testament is chock-full of testimony about Christ. Christ
fulfilled dozens and dozens of prophecies.

The Pharisees did not hear the voice of the Father, because they did not
want to, not because they did not hear with their ears. Many Pharisees
would have been present at the baptism of Christ.

The Pharisees have not seen the form of God. This time the verb is
o)ra/w, and it does not mean to see with the organs of sight, but with
the organ of the heart.

The part of God that the Pharisees do not see is EIDOS. This is actually
a cognate of HORAO, and speakers of Greek employed it to describe the
outward form of an idol.

God did reveal Himself in theophanies during Old Testament
dispensations, but those days are past by the time this passage rolls
around.

Irony: they are right in front of the Son of God, and yet they do not
see God in Him.

### The Pharisees’ Rejection of the Witnesses and Their Negative Volition, vv.38-47

The Pharisees’ response to the word,“38 and you do not have His word
living in you, because you do not believe the one whom He sent.”

The participle me/nonta describes the wordless state of the Pharisees.
It is not that the Pharisees are without a knowledge of the Scripture,
for they could compete with the best in the world in this regard.

But, they do not have the word living in them. The present tense
combines with the meaning of the word so that it places a strong
emphasis on the indwelling and durative nature of the word.

Christ makes a point: you can know a tremendous amount about the word,
and still there is an issue about whether it dwells in you.

Whether the word dwells in you is entirely up to you. In order to make
the word dwell in yourself, you must make it a vital part of your life
and relationship with God.

The Pharisees never did do this, and so they rejected the witnesses.

Remember, there is negative volition at hearing the word, and negative
volition at using the word. The Pharisees fell into the latter category.

Their blind and failed search of the Scriptures, “39 You search the
Scriptures, because You assume to have eternal life in them; and they
are those who testify about Me!”

Something amazing: the Pharisees search the Scriptures, because they
assume to have eternal life in them. This sounds good, and yet the
Pharisees missed something, for sure.

ERAUNTE describes a search only when you do not know what you seek. It
describes the exploratory operation in surgery, or the endless and
fruitless quest of philosophy.

Searching the Scriptures would normally be a good thing; but when you
search and do not know why, then you are in trouble. You will not find
the object for which you search if you do not know what it is.

The verb DOKEITE means to assume something. It describes presumptive
thinking. Christ inserts the personal pronoun HUMEIS in order to show
His surprise that the Pharisees do this. It could be translated, “even
you”.

The Pharisees assume that they have eternal life in the Scriptures, and
this is a good assumption.

With this good assumption they go on to search aimlessly through the
Scriptures, paying a great deal of attention to detail which did not
exist, and failing to discover eternal life.

Christ is eternal life, and the Old Testament is full of testimony about
Him.

What the Pharisees desire is a quality of life, but they assume that the
quality is legalism, and living Scripture to the letter, and even their
letter.

The eternal life of Christ comes by dwelling in God through Scripture.

Their current response to Christ in spite of the witnesses, “40 And you
do not want to come to Me in order that you might have life!”

Now Christ registers His indignant surprise at the negative volition of
the Pharisees.

They search the Scriptures, but do not see Him there. How ridiculous!
How stupid.

They have John the Baptist; God the Father; the Old Testament; the works
of Christ. What more could they possibly want? Why don’t they see
Christ?

The policy of Christ related to approbation from men “41 I do not
receive glory from men,”

The do/can of man is any extraneous or illegitimate approbation which He
might receive. 1 Pet 1:24 [Isa 40:6], “All flesh is like grass, and all
its glory like the flower of grass. The grass withers, and the flower
falls off, but the word of the Lord abides forever.”

Christ here sets up a contrast with the Pharisees, who loved the
approbation directed toward their illegitimate activities, and given for
ulterior motives.

Christ includes the preposition PARA: This portrays on or more persons
and that something proceeds from this person or persons.

The noun ANTHROPON is plural, and it gathers all of mankind into one
generic class; it could just as well be translated “mankind,” or,
“people.”

The Pharisees’ lack of virtue love, “42 but I have known you, that you
do not have the love of God in yourselves.”

The conjunction ALLA is not adversative, so much as it is transitional.
It changes gears to the next clause, which has to do with what the
Pharisees lack.

The Pharisees lack true love - the virtue love of God. The virtue love
of God is certainly something that would be acceptable to Christ in His
judgments.

Christ uses the perfect tense of the verb “to know”. Christ has already
had experiences with the Pharisees, so that He knows of their lack of
virtue.

Again, they have a thorough knowledge of the Scriptures without the love
of God. What a spectacular failure.

If Christ has the authority to judge mankind, and He knows the Pharisees
do not have what it takes, well, this should chill them to the bone.

The Pharisees’ willingness to receive false messiahs, “43 I have come in
the name of My Father, and you do not receive Me; If another shall come
in his own name you will receive him!”

Christ came in the name of the Father, and with many testimonies about
His true nature.

Christ uses the personal pronoun EGO to form a contrast between Himself
and the false messiahs of the day.

Christ forms a hypothetical future case with something called the future
more vivid construction. It creates a likely scenario, and then adds a
definite outcome.

The likely scenario is the coming of another false messiah. In fact,
many false messiahs have come since that day, and many even in the
lifetimes of the Pharisees who listened then to the words of Christ.

The definite outcome is that the Pharisees will receive this false one.
There is no question left in the construction.

It is a prediction base on the current state of the souls of these
Pharisees. Their legalism and unhappiness has left them quite vulnerable
to false doctrine and false messiahs.

The impossibility of the Pharisees’ belief, and the reason, “44 How can
you believe, while receiving glory from one another, and you do not seek
the glory which is from the only God?”

You cannot believe in Christ and at the same time seek the approbation
from men. Christ knows the fatal distraction of the Pharisees quite
well!

The Pharisees searched the Scriptures for nothing, but for their work
they hoped to receive glory from one another and from man.

The glory which is from the only God is Christ Himself, and the
relationship with God which He brings to man.

ZETEITE denotes the search for what is known. It contrasts strongly
against the preceding verb of searching.

It is really a rhetorical question.

The Pharisees present judge, “45 Do not assume that I will accuse you
before the Father; your accuser is Moses, in whom you have hoped.”

The indictment against the Pharisees comes from the Law of Moses.

They have place their hope in Moses - that is, in their fulfillment of
the letter and ritual of the Law of Moses.

Yet the law of Moses exists in order to lead the way to God, and to
provide the basis for a continuing relationship with Him. Of course, the
Pharisees utterly failed to see this.

So this same Law of Moses forms their indictment.

The first part goes to the future, to the Great White Throne, where both
believer and unbeliever Pharisees will be judged. In both cases, Christ
will not accuse them.

The second part indicates that the judgment from the Law already exists
- it is in the present tense.

Again, there should be a chilling effect on the legalists who listened
to Christ on this occasion and others like it. Will the Law of Moses be
read at their judgment? It is entirely possible! How about Deuteronomy
6?

Their rejection of Moses, “46 For if you believed Moses [and you did
not], you believed in Me; for he wrote about Me.”

Christ now makes a very clear and pointed comment: that they do not
believe in Moses!

He does this with a present unreal conditional sentence. In this
construction, the protasis is considered untrue, and the apodosis simply
hypothetical.

So it goes like this. If you believed (but you didn’t) then you would
have believed in Moses (but of course you do not).

The rejection applied to belief in Christ, “47 But if you do not believe
in his writings, how can you believe in My word?”

The Pharisees do not believe in the writings of Moses - they do not
believe in them at least as God intended.

The Pharisees do believe in the writings of Moses as they interpret
them, but that does not count before God.

It is impossible to reject Moses and at the same time receive Christ. If
you miss Moses, you will most certainly miss Christ.

Another Sabbath Controversy
---------------------------

**Matt. 12:1-8**: 1“At that time Jesus went on the Sabbath through the
grain fields, and His disciples became hungry and began to pick the
heads of grain and eat. 2 But when the Pharisees saw it, they said to
Him,”Look, Your disciples do what is not right to do on a Sabbath." 3
But he said to them, “Have you not read what David did, when he became
hungry, he and his companions; 4 how he entered the house of God, and
they ate the consecrated bread, which was not ‘right’ for him to eat,
nor for those with him, but for the priests alone? 5 Or have you not
read in the Law, that on the Sabbath the priests in the temple break the
Sabbath, and are innocent? 6 But I say to you, that something greater
than the temple is here. 7 But if you had known what this means, ‘I
desire mercy, and not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the
innocent. 8 For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”

**Mark 2:23-28** “And He happened to be passing through the grain fields
on the Sabbath, and His disciples began to make their way along while
picking the heads of grain. 24 And the Pharisees were saying to
Him,”Look, why are they doing what is not right on the Sabbath?" 25 And
He said to them, “Have you never read what David did when he was in need
and became hungry, he and his companions: 26 how he entered the house of
God in the time of Abiathar the high priest, and ate the consecrated
bread, which is not ‘right’ for anyone to eat except the priests, and he
gave it also to those who were with him?” 27 And He was saying to them,
"The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. 28
Consequently, the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath.

**Luke 6:1-5** “Now He happened on a certain Sabbath to be passing
through some grain fields; and His disciples were picking and eating the
heads of grain, rubbing them in their hands. 2 But some of the Pharisees
said,”Why do you do what is not right on the Sabbath?" 3 And Jesus
answering them said, “Have you not even read what David did when he was
hungry, he and those who were with him, 4 how he entered the house of
God, and took and ate the consecrated bread which is not ‘right’ for any
to eat except the priests alone, and gave it to his companions?” 5 And
He was saying to them, “The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”

Outline

The incident (Matthew, Mark, Luke).

The Pharisees’ reaction and accusation (Matthew, Mark, Luke)

Christ’s defense and counter-indictment.

The precedent of David and His companions (Matthew, Mark, Luke).

The support from the Law (Matthew).

The present day existence of a superior principle (Matthew).

The principle of relationship with God (Matthew).

The principle of priority in creation (Mark).

The principle of priority in rank (Matthew, Mark, Luke)

Harmonic Conversion

At that time Jesus and His disciples were going through a grainfield,
and the disciples had just begun to pick and eat the heads of grain by
rubbing them in their hands.

All three gospels contain the necessary information, but Luke is more
explicit that the disciples had actually consumed some of the grain when
the Pharisees issued their complaint.

Matthew and Mark make it clear that they had only just begun to pick and
eat, but they are unclear as to whether the food had passed their lips.

The difference is somewhat important - they had indeed done the deed,
and not just begun it.

The grain fields are not specifically located - nor is this detail
important. But there is a clue here as to the timing of this event - it
is late summer, near the harvest, for the grain was edible.

Rubbing a head of grain with the hands removes the chaff. That the
disciples could accomplish this with an easy motion points to the
ripeness of the grain.

And the Pharisees saw this, and said to Christ, “Look, why are they
doing what is not right on the Sabbath?”

The Pharisees were lurking nearby. If this is near Jerusalem, their
presence next to the grainfield would be understandable; if not, then
they are simply hounding Christ and the disciples in order to ‘get’
something on them.

They think they might have it here, but they are sorely mistaken.

All three of the gospels use the Greek e)/cestin to denote their idea of
morality. This word is closely related to e)cousi/a. Where the latter
denotes a human right, the former moves to the more abstract realm of
what is right. It is not exactly the written Law, so much as it is
natural law. It concentrates on the principle behind what may be
written.

They relate the activity of the disciples to their understanding of the
Sabbath, and conclude that the activity is not right.

Their idea comes from the fourth commandment, recorded in Exodus
20:8-11, “Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days you shall
labor and do all your work, but the seventh day is a sabbath of the Lord
your God; in it you shall not do any work, you or your son or your
daughter, your male or your female servant or your cattle or your
sojourner who stays with you. For in six days the Lord made the heavens
and the earth, the sea and all that is in them, and rested on the
seventh day; therefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day and made it
holy.”

You will immediately notice the absence of a prohibition against picking
grain. In fact, it is clear that there are no specifics at all
pertaining to the stoppage of work on this day. Therefore the complaint
of the Pharisees has to do with their interpretation of work on the
Sabbath.

What is left unsaid is why the disciples must eat this grain - why they
have not eaten an so must use this unconventional method of
provisioning. The answer to this question in turn answers the query of
the Pharisees.

But He said to them…

“Have you not read what David did, when he was in need, and became
hungry, he and his companions; how he entered the house of God in the
time of Abiathar, and they ate the consecrated bread, which was not
‘right’ for him to eat, nor for those with him, but for the priests
alone?”

The event to which Jesus refers is from 1 Samuel 21:1-6, but the
background comes from the chapters before.

David kills Goliath, and becomes a great hero for the nation of Israel
(1 Sam 17).

David and Jonathan the son of Saul become fast friends; the women of
Israel greet David as a greater hero than Saul; Saul is jealous of
David; Saul twice attempts David’s life; David prospers greatly; David
and Michal, the daughter of Saul are to be married; Saul attempts to
trick David by the great Philistine foreskin caper, and thus the hand of
Michal was won; David has much success against the Philistines in battle
(1 Sam 18).

Saul issues a general order to put David to death; Jonathan talks his
father out of this plot; time passes and war with the Philistines
resumes - David is again a great military hero; Saul resumes his
jealousy and makes another personal attempt on the life of David; Saul
renews the general decree against David’s life; Michal assists David in
his escape from the royal palace (Psalm 59); David flees to Samuel at
Ramah; they flee together to Naioth; Saul sends his henchmen to capture
David at Naiaoth, but they are thrice thwarted by the Spirit of God
through Samuel; Saul goes there personally, and the Spirit thwarts him
as well; the chapter ends with Saul naked and humiliated, prophesying
for twenty four straight hours under the control of the Spirit (1 Sam
19).

David flees back to Ramah, and meets there with Jonathan; they conspire
together to save David’s life; David hides in a field near Jerusalem to
await the word of Jonathan; Saul learns of this conspiracy from Jonathan
himself, and attempts to kill his own son; Jonathan warns David of his
danger, and David flees again (1 Sam 20).

#### Read 1 Sam 21:1-6

David in his desperation takes the sword of Goliath from Ahimelech, and
then flees to Gath, the hometown of Goliath (Psalm 34); Achish the king
of Gath turns against David, and David must act insane (Psalm 56) before
him in order to escape (1 Sam 21).

David arrives at the cave of Adullam (Psalm 57, 142), and there he
becomes captain of a band of outcasts, ala Robin Hood; He takes his aged
parents to the king of Moab in order to safeguard them there; David then
sorties to the forest of Hereth (AKA Sherwood); Saul discovers that
Ahimelech has aided David, and through Doeg the Edomite massacres eighty
five priests along with many other men, women, children, and even
animals; Ahimelech himself escapes to David; David accepts
responsibility for the slaughter (1 Sam 22).

John 5:16-18, “And for this reason the Jews were persecuting Jesus,
because He was doing these things on the Sabbath. But He answered
them,”My Father is working until now, and I Myself am working." For this
cause therefore the Jews were seeking all the more to kill Him, because
He not only was breaking the Sabbath, but also was calling God His own
Father, making Himself equal with God."

Now: Christ and His disciples are David and his men; and, the Pharisees
are Saul and his men.

Christ’s point is that an emergency situation may warrant the breaking
of the Sabbath. David’s flight illustrates the principle perfectly.

Although this was not a situation in which Christ was in danger of
losing His life, the Pharisees are certainly after His skin.

“Or have you not read the Law, that on the Sabbath the priests in the
temple break the Sabbath, and are innocent?”

There is no specific verse attached to this principle, but it is
certainly true.

Think about it: the priests have to work on the Sabbath; they carry out
many duties every Sabbath that would constitute the prohibition against
work.

Christ points out this issue, but does not make reference to the
Pharisees’ strict interpretation of the Law. The work of the priests on
the Sabbath would comprise work in anyone’s book.

This second point differs from the first, in that it points out an
exception to the work prohibition that is not an emergency. This applies
just as readily as the first, and even more so, because Christ has not
yet finished this element of His discourse.

“But I say to you, that something greater than the temple is here.”

The greater thing is the body and person of Christ.

The temple only foreshadows what would be fulfilled in every way in Him.

The work of the priests in the temple all represented aspects of
Christ’s life and work.

Now which is greater, the fulfillment or the shadow?

So if the priests could break the Sabbath in the foreshadowing of
Christ, the mere presence of Christ would create a Sabbath negation
zone.

The presence of Christ provided the opportunity to Sabbath whenever He
taught doctrine, and that could be any day of the week, and any time.

With Christ present the need for the regimented weekly Sabbath was
entirely negated. An hour with Him would have been far superior to any
Sabbath day during the dispensation of Israel.

“But if you had know what this means: ‘I desire mercy, and not
sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the innocent.”

In this third principle, Christ quotes Hosea 6:6.

There are means to the substance of the Christian life, and there is the
substance itself.

The substance is always relationship with God through the Word of Truth.

During the dispensation of Israel, the means of the spiritual life were
the rituals given by God through Moses. God designed these rituals to
teach the Israelites about Himself, and relationship with Him. At no
time did God intend the rituals to become the substance of the spiritual
life.

The Pharisees were the masters of making the means into the substance -
the very thing which Hosea 6:6 refutes.

The test which the Pharisees should apply to Christ’s disciples is
whether their activity violates the substance. With Christ present in
the world, there is the unique opportunity to enjoy the substance of the
spiritual life at any time!

“The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.”

Look again at the first chapter of Genesis… which came first, man or the
Sabbath?

If man came first, then how could man be made for the Sabbath? It is
entirely the other way around!

And why was the Sabbath made for man? So that man would take time to
know God.

Believing that God made man for the Sabbath places a very wrong emphasis
on the means to the substance.

The substance is not ritual for the sake of ritual. God did not make man
so that he would worship the Sabbath; the Sabbath was never a god to be
worshipped, and yet that is exactly what the Pharisees desired for those
under their authority.

The Pharisees had manufactured an idol from the rituals which God
provided. They worshipped the means, and threw away the substance of Old
Testament spiritual life.

And He was saying to them, “The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”

The final argument of Christ concentrates on His own authority.

If God made the Sabbath for man, then the Lord of all men should rule
the Sabbath indeed.

Christ is the Lord of all men, and thus the Lord of the Sabbath as well.
It is therefore His prerogative to do what He desires on the Sabbath,
and to direct His disciples to do as He wishes, regardless of the day of
the week.

And all this over such a little thing as eating grain on the fly!

Healing on the Sabbath
----------------------

**Matthew 12:9-14**: “9 And departing there, He went into their
synagogue. And behold, a man has a withered hand. 10 And they questioned
Him, saying,”Is it right to heal on the Sabbath?" - in order that they
might bring charges against Him. 11 But He said to them, “What man will
there be among you, who will have one sheep, and if it falls into a pit
on the Sabbath, will he not grab it and raise it out? 12 How greatly a
man differs from a sheep! So then, it is right to do good on the
Sabbath.” 13 Then He says to the man, “Stretch out your hand!” And he
stretched it out, and it was restored to full health, like the other. 14
But the Pharisees went out, and plotted together against Him, that they
might destroy Him."

**Mark 3:1-6**: “1 And He entered again into the synagogue; and a man
was there with a badly withered hand. 2 And they were scrutinizing Him
to see whether He would heal him on the Sabbath, in order that they
might bring charges against Him. 3 And he says to the man with the
withered hand,”Rise into the middle!" 4 And He says to them, “Is it
right on the Sabbath to do good or to do evil, to save a soul or to
kill?” But they kept silent. 5 And after looking around at them with
anger, grieved at their hardness of heart, He says to the man, “Stretch
out the hand.” And he stretched it out, and his hand was restored. 6 And
the Pharisees went out and immediately were plotting together with the
Herodians against Him, that they might destroy Him."

**Luke 6:6-11** “6 And it came about on a different Sabbath, that He
entered the synagogue and was teaching; and there was a man there and
his right hand was withered. 7 And the scribes and the Pharisees were
scrutinizing Him, to see whether He would heal on the Sabbath, in order
that they might find grounds to bring charges against Him. 8 But He knew
their plans, and He said to the man with the withered hand,”Rise and
stand in the middle!" 9 And Jesus said to them, “I ask you, is it right
on the Sabbath to do good, or to do evil, to save a soul, or to destroy
it?” 10 And after looking around at them all, He said to him, “Stretch
out your hand!” And he did, and his hand was restored. 11 But they
themselves were filled with [irrational] rage, and discussed together
what they might do to Jesus."

Outline

The Setting.

Christ is teaching in the synagogue of the persecuting Jews. “And He
departed there. And it came about on a different Sabbath, that He
entered their synagogue, and was teaching;”

Christ leaves from the vicinity of the grainfield, where He had just
concluded a controversy with the Pharisees over the issue of the
Sabbath.

On a different Sabbath, not long after the grainfield Sabbath, Christ
entered their synagogue, and was teaching. Of course this was Christ’s
modus operandi - to teach in the synagogues, where the Jews had gathered
to listen to the Word.

So the Pharisees had the home synagogue advantage.

Now this is a synagogue, and it appears that Christ has gone back to
Galilee, for there were no synagogues in Jerusalem proper - there would
be no need.

The opportunity - the man with the badly withered hand. “And there was a
man there whose right hand was badly withered.”

Luke is the doctor who notices details. Although he was not there, he
would naturally inquire as to which hand was withered. It is the right
hand, which would have had a profound impact on the life of the man.
Luke would only say this if it mattered - the man was likely
right-handed, and truly crippled by this event.

Mark records the impression of the impressionable Peter, who describes
the condition with the perfect participle. This shows both severity and
permanence.

The verb XERAINO and the noun CHEIROS describe the hand. These words
indicate a parched, dried, and even diseased state. The problem with the
hand therefore may have come from a disease, and maybe from a terrible
burn. The source does not matter - the condition does. It was a
terrible, irreversible condition that was a considerable handicap.

The opposition - the Pharisees who conspire against Him. “And the
scribes and the Pharisees were scrutinizing Him, to see whether He would
heal him on the Sabbath, in order that they might find grounds to bring
charges against Him.”

The scribes and the Pharisees watch Christ like a hawk. They want Him,
and they want Him badly. The verb for ‘scrutinize’ is PARATEREO, which
means literally, ‘to keep beside’. In other words, they stayed close to
Him, in order to catch Him.

They were looking for grounds for a legal accusation, and they felt they
could get it if Christ healed this man on the Sabbath. KATEGOREO is a
Greek verb which meant to bring formal charges against a person. Our own
English verb categorize does not quite have this meaning, but if you
employ it in the personal judgment of a person it comes close.

The scribes and the Pharisees had quite a dilemma. They could not kill
Christ outright, for that would be murder. They did not want Him
assassinated, for that would create a martyr. Their only other option
was religious vilification combined with capital punishment. They
initiated that policy here, even though they would not succeed for
another two years.

The charge: healing on the Sabbath. “And they questioned Him, saying,”Is
it right to heal on the Sabbath?“”

The Pharisees were never ones to let manners interfere with their
regulation of events. They interrupted Christ’s teaching in order to
bring up the subject of healing on the Sabbath.

Again they use the verb EXESTIN to define the issue. In their minds, is
it right to heal on the Sabbath. The verb goes all the way back to
natural law.

The Reply. “But He had known their plans, and He said to the man with
the withered hand,”Rise and stand in the middle!“” Christ knew their
plans - the pluperfect tense of OIDA. In fact He had known them (John
5:16,18), and from this knowledge knew exactly what to do. The command
to stand in the middle MESON has in mind the common synagogue layout of
the day, which kept a platform in the middle, and seating in the round.

The illustration of the endangered sheep. “And He said to them,”What man
will there be among you, who will have one sheep, and if it falls into a
pit on the Sabbath, will he not grab it and raise it out? How greatly a
man differs from a sheep!“”

I have retained the future tense, although smoother translation would be
in the present, “What man is there among you…”

Christ confronts the Pharisees here - and tells them of their own
practice of breaking the Sabbath. This makes it clear that the Pharisees
must arrest themselves if they are to arrest Jesus.

A fundamental point to Christ’s argument is that the man in the
illustration has only one sheep. If a man has only one sheep, then that
sheep is of paramount importance. The livestock of the ancient world was
rather like the modern automobile - it was both a sign of wealth and a
means to wealth.

If the sheep falls into a pit on the Sabbath, it may well die in the
next twenty four hours, who would allow such a torturous death on his
own animal? Wouldn’t it be merciful and God-like to rescue it?

The grabbing and lifting would certainly be considered work by any
objective standard, and not just by the stringent definition of the
Pharisees.

But the grabbing and lifting would be an act of mercy, and so would fit
within the frame of reference of healing as well.

A contrast arises: when Christ heals, it is by the power of God, and not
by His own effort; yet when the Pharisees would rescue their one sheep,
it would be by human effort alone.

Then Christ turns their attention to the man, standing on the platform
with Him. His argument is truly flawless.

And recall that Christ does this for the benefit of the Pharisees and
scribes, so that they would see that He is correct, and find the true
nature of compassion.

The principle: a good work is not ‘Sabbath’ work. “And then He said to
them,”I ask you, is it right on the Sabbath to do good, or to do evil,
to save a soul, or to destroy it? So then, it is right to do good on the
Sabbath." But they kept silent."

A good work or a bad deed does not come into play in the Sabbath frame
of reference.

The question that Christ brings to the fore is an excellent one: does
one refrain from the application of the truth on the Sabbath? Of course
not!

Saving a sheep is an application of truth; so also healing a man.

Good deeds and saving a soul PSUCHEN are in the same category. Saving a
soul actually refers to saving a life - that is, keeping the soul in the
human body. It is not really saving a soul in the context of eternal
salvation. Here, it connects with the soul of the endangered sheep,
while the good deed would be the healing of the man with the withered
hand.

Bad deeds and destroying souls are in another category. If you left the
sheep, you would be doing a bad deed - it would be sinful to let it die
in agony. In the same way, it would be sinful not to heal the man before
them on the Sabbath.

Christ come to a conclusion for all who are present: it is right to do
good on the Sabbath!

But the scribes and Pharisees kept silent. What a strong expression of
negative volition. Christ presents a brilliant argument - one that is
extremely convincing. And yet, they keep silent. Now this is arrogance
of the first degree.

The Healing. “And after looking around at them with anger, grieved at
their hardness of heart, He said to the man,”Stretch out your hand!" And
he stretched it out, and it was restored to full health, like the
other."

Hardness of heart is the same as spiritual blindness. It is a
characteristic of those who have repeatedly rejected the truth of God,
and accepted the cosmic counterfeits and lies. Their motive is most
likely power lust.

Christ is grieved, sullupe/omai is a compound verb, composed of the
preposition sun and the verb lupe/omai. The addition of the preposition
only adds strength to the basic meaning of the verb, which is “to
receive offense”. It is not grief in the sense of mourning, but offense
in the sense that someone has done something to hurt you.

Christ looks around at them in anger, ORGES. Having taken offense at
their spiritual blindness.

Christ is not out of fellowship over this. His anger is not irrational,
nor is it unfounded. What this verse conveys is that the Pharisees do
wrong to Christ by rejecting His perfect rationale for healing the man
before them, and that Christ knows that they have done this to spite
Him.

Christ does what is right then, and at the same time demonstrates that
their hardness of heart has no effect on His doing what is right. Christ
must do what is right, even if others think it wrong.

The Response of the Pharisees. “But they themselves were filled with
[irrational] rage, and they were plotting together with the Herodians
against Him, that they might destroy Him.”

It is so important to see the contrast between the ORGES of Christ and
the irrational rage of the Pharisees.

The Pharisees were filled EPLESTHESAN with irrational rage ANOIAS.

The verb is in the passive voice, showing that the subject receives its
action. Here the subjects are the scribes and Pharisees. This portrays
the out of control nature of their emotion.

The noun is really a compound word which literally means “unthinking”.

The Herodians were men of influence and partisans of the Herodian house.
They were much the same as the Sadducees with regard to their religious
beliefs. They would have been strange bedfellows, but for their common
hatred of Christ.

This does not bring anything new from the viewpoint of the Pharisees,
but Mark mentions the plot in order to bring in the Herodians. The
Sadducees.

This religious group came into being about 300 years before Christ. They
are characterized by their aristocracy, their cultural surrender to the
Greeks and others, and their opposition to everything Pharasaic.

Their name comes from the Aramaic Sadduqim, which meant ‘righteousness’.
However, those who were in opposition to them called them saddiqim,
which meant ‘destruction’.

They came from the ranks of the priests and high priests of Israel,
during the time of the Greek occupation. Their desire was to give in to
the Hellenizing influences of the Greeks, and thus retain their favor.

The Sadducees had a lot to lose to the occupation forces of the Greeks,
because they were mostly prosperous, aristocratic people. In order to
maintain their lifestyles and possessions, they placated the Greeks,
giving in to their cultural and even religious influences.

During the Maccabaean revolt, they stayed in the background. They were
in fact very unpopular. When Jonathan Maccabee was appointed high priest
by popular demand, it looked like the Sadducees would be gone forever.
At the time, almost all of the people in the land were willing to
sacrifice anything for their freedom. The strong oppression of the
Syrians drove them to this sacrificial attitude.

After about 40 years of on and off civil war, the Jews became tired of
the bloodshed, and popular opinion tended toward peace. In this case,
peace meant compromise, and compromise was the game of the Sadducees.
John Hyrcanus, of the Maccabees, was really very close to the Sadducee
way of thinking.

However, the compromising policy of Hyrcanus became unpopular in a few
years, and so the Pharisees came into power.

Due to the double tyranny of the Pharisees and king Herod, the Sadducees
had made a great comeback not long before the birth of Christ. Let’s
face it: the Pharisees were no fun at all.

The religious beliefs of the Sadducees can be summed up in a single
thought: they were always opposed to what the Pharisees believed.

They believed that only the written Law is binding, whereas the
Pharisees believed that the body of tradition and written interpretation
were just as important as the Law itself.

The Sadducees punished breaches of the Law severely, but the Pharisees
often interpreted their way around the written Law, and thus got out of
the proscribed punishment.

They had a strong belief in human free will, while the Pharisees
believed in predestination to the point of being fatalistic.

They denied the resurrection, and any kind of continued existence of the
soul after physical death. This led to their inordinate value of private
property and possessions. The Pharisees, however, believed that the soul
continued after death, and that there would be a severe judgement in
eternity.

The Sadducees did not believe in angelic beings, or demons, and any
reference to such in Scripture was converted to a manifestation of God
Himself. The Pharisees did believe in angels.

The Sadducees always reserved the right of private opinion about
Scripture and the Law, while the Pharisees rejected that right,
tyrannically imposing their opinions on all.

The Sadducees were a mixture of both the conservative and the liberal
from today’s American society. The pressures of history and their
religious beliefs worked together to make them what they were. Although
they had some good elements to their philosophy, they were just as
spiritually and morally bankrupt as the Pharisees. They are a good
example of wrong reaction for the right reason. It was a good thing to
be opposed to the religious tyranny of the Pharisees, but the motives of
the Sadducees were wrong, and thus their beliefs went in the wrong
direction. Although religion was important to them, relationship with
God was not, and so they destroyed themselves. They left the pages of
history forever after the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 A.D.

Transition to the Sermon on the Mount
-------------------------------------

Read Matthew 12:15-21

Read Mark 3:7-12

**Outline**

The geographical movement of Christ and His disciples.

The reason. “But Jesus, knowing [this],”

Jesus knew that the Pharisees and Herodians were trying to kill Him.

In fact, He knew this even before the grain field incident, as we have
seen.

The movement. " withdrew from there to the sea with His disciples."

“There” is again undefined. We do not know the location of the grain
field, nor do we know the position of the synagogue where the withered
hand incident took place.

But we do know that Christ went with His disciples down the sea, and of
course the sea is the Sea of Galilee. So, they are somewhere on the
coast of the Sea of Galilee.

The attendant movement of His followers.

The following. “And a great multitude from Galilee followed;”

First, we have the fact of the following. They followed Him from Galilee
and beyond Galilee.

And second, the reason, which was the usual reason - because He healed
people.

Their places of origin. “and also from Judea, and from Jerusalem, and
from Idumai, and [from] beyond the Jordan, and [from] the vicinity of
Tyre and Sidon,”

Judea is the southern region of Israel. It was 50-75 miles from Judea to
the Sea of Galilee. Our modern equivalent: two or three days’ drive…
1500 miles.

Jerusalem is about sixty miles from the Sea of Galilee.

Idumai, or Idumaea was about 100 miles to the south, south even of
Judea, or a good four days journey.

Beyond the Jordan is 30 to 60 miles to the southeast from the Sea of
Galilee.

Tyre and Sidon lie about 30 and 40 miles to the northwest from the Sea
of Galilee.

Conclusion: the people of the surrounding regions were coming from all
over to see Christ and to receive His healing touch.

**The desperation of the multitude.**

The healings. “a great multitude hearing what great things that He was
doing came to Him…” “…for He had healed them all,”

Although these two parts of the narrative are out of order, they are in
the outline here to explain the motivation of the crowd.

Christ had healed some of them, and the word got out, and so they were
coming from all over.

Mark says that “Christ healed them all.” In other words, it was His
current policy to heal every last one who came to Him. Christ did not
heal every sick person in the region - only those who came to Him, and
only those who came to Him at this time.

It was never the policy or intent to heal every human being of their
physical ailments.

The chaotic reaction of the multitude. "in order that they might not
press upon Him; for He had healed them all, so that as many as had
afflictions fell upon him to cling to Him.

This is a very chaotic scene.

The people press in against Christ, the sick and afflicted falling upon
Him and clinging to Him; hundreds and thousands of people falling and
flailing and touching and grabbing and clinging.

In fact, it would not only be chaotic, but dangerous.

The necessity of physical separation. “And He told His disciples that a
boat should stand ready for Him”

What a clever, Satanic plot. The people are so anxious to touch Him and
cling to Him that they would kill Him in their frenzy.

So Christ very wisely told His disciples to keep a boat ready for Him,
so that He can escape their clutches.

Technicality: it does not say that Christ actually got into the boat.
Perhaps its presence was enough to settle down the crowd.

The testimony of the unclean spirits. “And the unclean spirits, whenever
they beheld Him, fell down before Him and cried out, saying,”You are the
Son of God!"

“unclean spirits” is a synonym for demon possessed people. The spirits
were not falling down before Him on their own, but instead they were
causing the bodies that they occupied to do so.

The spirits were causing their hosts to cry out “You are the Son of
God!” Now why would they do this?

The first possibility is that they feared a penalty which Christ could
bring against them - namely, imprisonment in the abyss. And so their
public declaration and movement could have been an attempt at avoiding
this terrible imprisonment.

But, it is much more likely that they were trying to whip the crowd into
a frenzy, and thus have Christ die by accident before He could properly
introduce His kingdom.

Think: Christ has done many miraculous things, and His life has been
full of wonder, but what word has He spoken of His kingdom?

The truth is, He is about to talk about His kingdom for the very first
time, and it would be just the right time from Satan’s point of view for
Him to die.

Christ had no chance of anonymity here. The demons would draw attention
to Him wherever He went… and at all times whipping up crowds to throng
against Him and even endanger Him.

**The exhortation for silence**

“And He strongly exhorted them not to make Him known,”

This exhortation went out not only to the demons, but also to all that
He healed.

The Greek verb is EPETIMESEN, which means to give strong honor or
respect, and in a negative connotation to warn.

Here we may have a dual connotation: a warning against the fallen angels
who were attempting to have Him killed by frenzy, and an exhortation
against the people who pressed against Him.

The fulfillment of the prophecy of Isaiah. in order that the word [which
came] through Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, saying, ‘Behold, My
Servant whom I have chosen; My Beloved in whom My soul is well-pleased;
I will put My Spirit upon Him, And He shall proclaim justice to the
Gentiles. He will not quarrel, nor cry out; nor will anyone in the
streets hear His voice. A battered reed He will not break off, and a
smoldering wick He will not snuff, until He casts out judgment for
victory. And in His name the Gentiles will hope.’"

This quote is from Isaiah 42:1-4. You should note that Matthew
paraphrases a good deal of it without compromising its essence.

Here is the quote from the New American Standard: “1 Behold, My Servant,
whom I uphold; my chosen one in whom My soul delights. I have put My
Spirit upon Him; He will bring forth justice to the nations. 2 He will
not cry out or raise His voice, nor make His voice heard in the street.
3 A bruised reed He will not break, and a dimly burning wick He will not
extinguish; He will faithfully bring forth justice. 4 He will not be
disheartened or crushed, until He has established justice in the earth;
and the coastlands will wait expectantly for His law.”

The Septuagint translates this way: “1 I will come to the aid of Jacob
Israel my servant. My chosen one - my soul delights in him. I have given
my Spirit upon Him; He will lead out judgment to the Gentiles. 2 He will
not cry out nor yell; nor will His voice be heard outside. 3 He will not
crush a reed that has been crushed and he will not snuff a dimly burning
wick - but - He will lead justice into truth. 4 He will take up and He
will not be broken until He has established justice upon the earth. And
the Gentiles will hope in His name.”

First observation: this looks really tangled!

First simplification: Matthew did not take his quote from the
Septuagint! Throw it out!

Second simplification: Matthew is simply paraphrasing the Hebrew text -
there is no great need for an exact translation.

When you paraphrase a passage, you paint with broad strokes of the
brush. You capture essence, and not letter. Paraphrasing is the
impressionism of translation.

Now, the impression that Matthew was attempting to give.

The impression has to do with the whole passage in Isaiah, else Matthew
would have quoted it only in part.

This passage has been fulfilled in part at the baptism of Jesus Christ.

The voice from heaven said some of these things, and the Spirit
descended in bodily form as a dove.

But the impression that Matthew attempts to give here does not have to
do with the events at Christ’s baptism.

The impression does not have to do with the Gentiles, for Matthew does
not include them in his narrative.

The impression has to do with the silence that Christ requires of the
crowds (but not necessarily of the demons).

Here it is: Christ will make no ripple or wave on the face of the earth
until He casts out judgment for victory.

The picture in the Greek is that of an exchange of judgment for victory.
This can only be the cross.

So, Isaiah 42:1-4 predicts that the Messiah will make no violent moves
until He has paid for the sins of man.

You will notice that anything within the integrity of God will be
allowed after the atonement.

Christ does not want the approbation, and He really cannot truly have it
anyway until after the atonement.

Remember what Christ will do at the second advent. With a shout, with
the voice of the archangel! 10. This was a common critique of the Jews -
that Christ did not make a big splash when He came.

Distinctions on the policy of non-violence.

This policy applies to every aspect of Christ’s life.

This policy is restricted to the incarnation only.

This policy is a dispensational constant for evangelization.

This policy does not apply in matters of divine establishment for the
church age.

The United States is a Gentile client nation, and the Laws of Divine
Establishment should apply.

Luke 21:24: “…and Jerusalem will be trampled under foot by the Gentiles
until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.”

The context is the Olivet discourse, where Christ told His disciples of
the things to come.

If you remember from the fig tree special, this discourse makes some
generalizations about the church age before it gets to the specific
predictions of the tribulation.

A part of the discourse not contained in Matthew 24 is that part which
deals with the destruction of Jerusalem and the rule of the Gentiles.

Luke covers this in chapter 21, verses 20-24 of his gospel.

Christ indicates that the church age will be characterized by Gentile
dominance.

The laws of Divine Establishment are outlined in codices 1 and 3 of the
Mosaic Law.

Codex 1 is the freedom code, or the 10 commandments.

Codex 3 is the establishment code, and is set forth in Lev 11-20 and
Exodus 21:1-23:9.

The spiritual code, which is codex 2 of the Mosaic Law, is not a
requirement for the client nation. It is set forth in Lev 1-8, 21-25,
and Exodus 25-40.

Summary: because Christ does not rule the planet during the church age,
the Laws of Divine Establishment apply to Gentile nations. The nation
which heeds these laws is a ‘client’ nation.

And, there are many indications from the epistles that the LDE are
brought forward into the church age. Romans 1; 1 Tim 1:8-10.

The Beatitudes
--------------

Beatitudes Quick Review

The first blessing: “Blessed are the poor in spirit, because theirs is
the Kingdom of God.”

And, there is something quite significant here: even though you may be a
believer, you are still poor in spirit! Many believers have a terrible
time with this concept, because they fail to understand that this sermon
assumes residence in the kingdom.

Now, this is truly a remarkable statement! You have no power, and yet
the kingdom of heaven belongs to you! But you can see that this is a
fantastic introductory statement. This is the wisest thing that you can
say to a new believer - just the simple fact that they are poor in
spirit - whether they like it or not, whether they acknowledge it or
not.

And, this is a blessing from God regardless of whether it is enjoyed.

This is not something you obtain by being humble; it is your estate
regardless of your attitude.

Furthermore, this is a remarkable statement because it holds in view the
doctrine of eternal security. You have the kingdom of heaven in spite of
your lack of merit!

Therefore the first blessing to the one in the kingdom is eternal
security.

The second blessing: “Blessed are they who mourn, because they will be
comforted.”

There are two ways to take the mourning: in the literal sense of
mourning for some loved one that is lost; in the figurative sense of
mourning over lost fellowship with God.

Now let’s turn to mourning. Mourning due to the loss of fellowship is a
fairly common Biblical theme.

Psalm 30: 1 I will extol You, O Lord, for You have lifted me up, and
have not let my enemies rejoice over me. 2 O Lord my god, I cried to You
for help, and You healed me. 3 O Lord, You have brought up my soul from
Sheol; You have kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit. 4
Sing praise to the Lord, you His godly ones, and give thanks to His holy
name. 5 For His anger is but for a moment, His favor is for a lifetime;
weeping may last for the night, but a shout of joy comes in the morning…
10 Hear, O Lord, and be gracious to me; O lord, be my helper. 11 You
have turned for me my mourning into dancing; You have loosed my
sackcloth and girded me with gladness. 12 That my soul may sing praise
to You, and not be silent. O Lord my God, I will give thanks to You
forever.

Psalm 38:1-8: “1 O Lord rebuke me not in Your wrath; and chasten me not
in Your burning anger. 2 For Your arrows have sunk deep into me, and
Your hand has pressed down on me. 3 There is no soundness in my flesh
because of Your indignation; there is no health in my bones because of
my sin. 4 For my iniquities are gone over my head; as a heavy burden the
weigh too much for me. 5 My wounds grow foul and fester because of my
folly. 6 I am bent over and greatly bowed down; I go mourning all day
long. 7 For my loins are filled with burning; and there is no soundness
in my flesh. 8 I am benumbed and badly crushed; I groan because of the
agitation of my heart.”

Isaiah 61:1-3 connects mourning and the atonement, “The Spirit of the
Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to bring good news
to the afflicted; He has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to
proclaim liberty to captives, and freedom to prisoners; 2 to proclaim
the favorable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to
comfort all who mourn, 3 to grant those who mourn in Zion, giving them a
garland instead of ashes, the oil of gladness instead of mourning, the
mantle of praise instead of a spirit of fainting. So they will be called
oaks of righteousness, the planting of the lord, that he may be
glorified.”

2 Corinthians 7:9-13 makes a very direct connection between sin and
grief. This passage seems almost as if Paul intended to clarify our
beatitude. “I now rejoice, not that you were made sorrowful, but that
you were made sorrowful to the point of repentance; for you were made
sorrowful according to the will God, in order that you might not suffer
loss in anything through us. For the sorrow that is according to the
will of God produces a repentance without regret, leading to salvation;
but the sorrow of the world produces death. For behold what earnestness
this very thing, this godly sorrow, has produced in you: what
vindication of yourselves, what indignation, what fear, what longing,
what zeal, what avenging of wrong! In everything you demonstrated
yourselves to be innocent in the matter. So although I wrote to you it
was not for the sake of the offender, nor for the sake of the one
offended, but that your earnestness on our behalf might be made known to
you in the sight of God. For this reason we have been comforted.”

Conclusion:

Emotion is NEVER to be a criteria for thought or action.

Emotion should ALWAYS remain subordinate to thought.

Motivation is a system of thought which leads to action.

Sin puts you out of fellowship with God, and God the Holy Spirit.

While you are out of fellowship, God inflicts varying degrees and
categories of suffering on your person.

These sufferings cause mental dissonance, and God designs them to get
you to wake up.

Once you understand that you are out of fellowship, and that you are
receiving divine discipline, your period of mourning begins.

Mourning over sin is a complex of thought about the sin that includes:

The perception of pain over the loss of fellowship.

The perception of pain because of the divine discipline.

The mental mourning over sin then should naturally invoke emotional
response in the form of sadness, or mourning.

This complex of thought and subordinate emotion naturally moves the
believer toward confession, and this is the intent of God.

Therefore, mourning is a blessing from God, for it brings comfort in the
restoration of fellowship. The comfort comes from the comforter, who is
God the Holy Spirit.

There is woe to those who laugh, because if they laugh at divine
discipline, and while they are out of fellowship they will have little
motive to confess. Hebrews 12:5, “and you have forgotten the exhortation
which is addressed to you as sons, ‘My son, do not regard lightly the
discipline of the Lord, nor faint when you are reproved by Him;’”

Mourning and feelings of guilt after the restoration of fellowship are
illegitimate, and should be all left behind.

The third blessing: “Blessed are the humble, because they will inherit
the earth.”

This really denotes the ability to solve problems without violence or
angry reaction - but to solve the problems really and truly through the
use of Bible Doctrine in the Soul.

Therefore this meekness really brings the idea of doctrinal problem
solving, and reliance on the truth vs. reliance on human viewpoint
solutions.

And therefore, there really is the connotation of doctrinal orientation
vs. human viewpoint orientation.

It brings the inheritance of the earth.

Inheriting the earth while Satan rules it is no prize. It is not about
that.

Neither does being meek bring in the millennium - there is nothing that
we can do to accomplish what only Christ can.

Therefore, this is about the inheritance of the earth during the
millennium, an inheritance based on the death of Christ.

The fourth blessing, “Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for
righteousness, because they will be filled.”

The words for hunger and thirst are pretty standard here - exactly what
we understand them to be in the English, with little or no extra
emphasis.

This blessing works as a companion to the “poor in spirit”. It is the
realization of that very state.

No person in this world has righteousness in an of him or her self. That
is the essence of being spiritually helpless. The one who hungers and
thirsts after righteousness has realized this, and thus seeks
righteousness in God.

This is about positive volition, and even quite a bit about doctrinal
dependence.

There are two righteousnesses related to Jesus Christ.

The first is the righteousness which He produced on the cross, and which
is imputed to us at the moment that we believe in Him. Rom 5:18, “So
then as through one transgression there resulted condemnation to all
men, even so through one act of righteousness there resulted
justification of [eternal] life to all men.”

The second righteousness is that which comes through the study of the
word of God.

2 Timothy 3:16, “All Scripture is inspired by God and profitable for
teaching, for reproof, for correction, for training in righteousness.”

1 Corinthians 2:16, “For who has known the mind of the Lord, that he
should instruct Him? But we have the mind of Christ.”

This beatitude concentrates on the second righteousness. This is a
righteousness which can only come through faith perception.

Hunger and thirst are very excellent metaphors for positive volition,
because they convey need, as opposed to simple desire.

Hungering and thirsting for righteousness is a simple honesty with self
about a spiritual need. It is the need for Divine viewpoint thinking.

Hungering and thirsting for righteousness leads to fulfillment. God is
100% faithful to positive volition.

10. The fulfilling that comes from knowing the word of God is a great
blessing in itself. To be filled to the point of overflowing is truly
great.

11. Being filled with the Word of God means:

Knowing God - the greatest person you will ever know.

Being able to resist temptation more effectively.

Being able to reduce the impact of sin in your life.

Understanding your destiny in Christ for this life and the next.

Tapping into a great portfolio of blessing for this life and the next.

Adding meaning to every blessing and understanding to every category of
suffering.

The development of an invincible Spiritual self esteem.

Becoming the recipient of Divine personal love.

Being able to solve life’s problems through doctrine, and not reaction.

15. Therefore, this is a fantastic blessing indeed.

The fifth blessing: “Blessed are the merciful, because they will be
shown mercy.”

All of the actions of God are done without conditions.

Unlimited atonement is an expression of Divine mercy, 1 John 2:2, “He is
the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not only for ours but also for
the sins of the whole world.”

Eternal security is an expression of Divine mercy, 1 John 3:1a, “How
great is the love the Father has lavished on us, that we should be
called children of God! And that is what we are!”

The life and death of Jesus Christ are the ultimate testimony of the
love of God.

An extension of your life is often an expression of mercy, so that you
may have another chance to use your volition responsibly.

The merciful of the tribulation will be shown mercy in the preservation
of their human lives in the tribulation. In fact, human mercy as
expressed in charity is very much a measure of Christian maturity during
the millennium.

The sixth blessing: “Blessed are the pure in heart, because they will
see God.”

Almost anyone can appear to be pure. This is not a great accomplishment.
But those who are privately and mentally pure are another category
entirely.

Why is anyone pure in heart? It only because they are in fellowship with
God. No one is righteous - no one at all. We can only be pure in heart
because of the ability of God to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Pure in heart does not refer to spiritual maturity, but rather the state
of being in fellowship and cleansed from all sins.

Putting the word in your heart causes personal purity related to
spiritual maturity.

Purity of heart is a requirement for prayer, 2 Tim 2:22, “Now flee from
youthful lusts, and pursue righteousness, faith, love, and peace, with
those who call on the Lord from a pure heart.”

Summary of Biblical references to maturity.

Purity may refer to the status of spiritual maturity.

Purity may also refer to the temporal state of being in fellowship with
God.

The only extra context we have is the blessing which attends the state.
And the blessing is that the pure in heart will see God. “will see God”
is the future indicative of OPSONTAI with the simple accusative case of
THEON .

So, those who are pure in heart now will see God in the future.

Observation: this future may be in one minute or it may extend to the
tribulation, the millennium, or even into eternity.

OPSONTAI however, is from the verb HORAO, and this verb designates a
category of sight that goes beyond on the literal to the figurative. It
is seeing God in the figurative sense, and thus what can only be seen
through the Word of God.

Question: do you have to be pure in heart before you can become pure in
heart? In other words, it is very important to separate the idea of
fellowship from the idea of maturity. Both derive from purity, but they
are quite distinct from one another.

Conclusion: this purity of heart is the fellowship which comes from the
confession of sin. Thus a connection exists between this and the second
beatitude, that to “they who mourn”.

Blessed are they who mourn, because they will be comforted [and thus
become pure in heart]; blessed are the pure in heart, because they will
see God. There is a definite string of blessings here, one balanced on
the other.

Purity of heart is the status of being in fellowship with God. It is
only while you are in fellowship that you can learn and apply most
doctrines.

The seventh blessing: “Blessed are the peacemakers, because they will be
called sons of God.”

The interpretation of the term is somewhat more difficult. We will begin
with the meaning of the word itself.

This is the only place in the Bible where this noun occurs. Its
corresponding verb appears in Colossians 1:20.

“For it was the Father’s good pleasure for all the fullness to dwell in
Him, and through Him to reconcile all things to Himself, having made
peace through the blood of His cross; through Him, I say, whether things
on earth or things in heaven.”

Christ is the peacemaker through the blood of His cross. Therefore, Paul
connects the word to the doctrine of reconciliation.

Christ was the peacemaker through His fantastic victory on the cross. He
founded that victory on His non-violent policy for the incarnation.

However, at the second advent, Christ will make peace through His great
military victory at the battle of Armageddon. That will be peace through
violent means.

If Christ is the peacemaker through the reconciliation, then certainly
we are whenever we introduce others to that same reconciliation.

So, peacemakers are purveyors of the gospel.

The peacemakers will be called the sons of God.

And so it comes to this: that this is a special reward for those who
lived or will live in any of the dispensations related to Israel.

12. A person’s name held great significance in Biblical times - probably
more so than it does today.

13. And to gain a new title, given by God Himself, would be significant
indeed.

14. To hold the same title as God the Son is truly a fantastic
complement. Peacemakers having the same title as THE peacemaker has a
certain poetic symmetry to it.

The eighth blessing and its explanation: " Blessed are those who have
been persecuted for the sake of righteousness, because theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. You are blessed whenever they insult you and
persecute you, and whenever they ostracize you and they insult you and
cast down your name as evil falsely for my sake. Rejoice and exult and
leap wildly, because your reward is great in heaven; for in the same way
they persecuted the prophets who were before you."

Conclusion: you may be persecuted for two reasons: because you are a
Christian, and because you are a mature Christian.

The blessing for this is the kingdom of heaven. This seems curious at
first, because the same is awarded the poor in spirit no matter what
they might do.

However, there is a contrast. In the first beatitude the emphasis lay on
eternal security. In this last one it is on eternity, period.

Next comes the explanation. It begins with the phrase “you are blessed”.

Then comes a command that is predicated on the persecution. “Rejoice and
exult and leap wildly, because your reward is great in heaven; for in
the same way they persecuted the prophets who were before you.”

The second pairing of verbs has to do with wild rejoicing. Matthew’s
verb concentrates more on verbal expression, while Luke’s on physical
expression. They both describe an ecstatic kind of rejoicing - the kind
that you see when you win the world series.

The reason for the rejoicing is the reward in heaven that waits for
those who endure undeserved suffering.

Undeserved suffering leads to great reward in heaven.

And, therefore Christ commands His hearers to rejoice when they
encounter it.

Waiting for the Kingdom
-----------------------

The Present Responsibility of Those Who Wait for the Kingdom

Matthew 5:13-16

Translation: “13 You are the salt of the earth; but if the salt becomes
foolish, how will it be salty? It is useful for nothing further except
when cast outside to be trampled by men. 14 You are the light of the
world. A city is not able to hide while laying on a hill; 15 nor do they
light a lamp and put it under the peck-measure, but they put it on the
lampstand, and it illuminates all that is in the house. 16 So let your
light shine before men, so that they might behold your good works and
glorify your Father Who is in heaven.”

Outline.

The principle of salt, v.13.

The identification of the hearers with salt.

The application of salt to witnessing.

The loss of saltiness due to foolishness.

The uselessness of saltless salt.

The principle of light, vv.14-16.

The identification of the hearers with light, v.14a.

The unhideability principle, v.14b.

The foolishness of lighting and hiding, v.15a.

The usefulness of the fully exposed light, v.15b.

The application to the hearers, v.16.

Exegesis.

This passage is not all what you might think, for it poses a
dispensational variable exclusive to the dispensation of the hypostatic
union.

Although there is a lot of application into the church age believer’s
life, you should know from the top that the church age believer has
more.

Distinctions.

The Dispensation of Israel concentrated on corporate witnessing. The
nation itself was the prime element of light to the world. There are
only a couple of notable exceptions like Jonah.

The Dispensation of the Hypostatic Union required individual
participation in the internal mission of witnessing to unbelieving
Israel. But the followers of Christ also had an ambassadorial function
to the whole world of unbelievers.

The Dispensation of the Church requires individual participation in the
external mission of witnessing to the unbelieving world. Since this is
an external mission, the Bible calls the church age believer an
ambassador, 2 Corinthians 5:20.

During the church age, any organization or nation built on strong
establishment principles and with a strong missionary movement will have
an excellent corporate witness without even trying.

However, the responsibility of personal evangelism lies heavily on the
individual, and functions entirely apart from the corporate witness.

Therefore the techniques of personal evangelism set forth in this
passage apply equally to church age believers.

This was a difficult time for personal evangelism.

Evangelism of the Jews was very difficult because of the stranglehold of
the legalistic Pharisees.

Evangelism of the Gentiles was very difficult because of the national
pride of Rome and the insidious idolatry of the time.

It is important to observe that Christ does not introduce the subject of
personal evangelism until after He has fully covered the plan of God.

Witnessing is not the plan of God for any believer.

Witnessing has its proper place as the natural outgrowth of the
fulfillment of the plan of God, and the believer’s love for God.

Witnessing becomes more effective because of spiritual growth.

Witnessing can be a roundabout motivation for spiritual growth.

The principle of salt, v.13.

Christ first identifies His hearers with salt. “You are the salt of the
earth.” Remember that His hearers are the inner circle of His disciples,
and therefore this comparison is restricted to members of the kingdom of
God alone.

They are identified with salt, and also their comparison with it is
extended to the earth.

The word GEN translates ‘earth’. Although it may denote ‘Israel’ at
times, it does not in this context. The other times that Christ employs
GEN in this sermon, it is always in the sense of the entire planet.

They are the salt which belongs to the whole earth, and more
specifically the people on it.

Now salt has some natural connotations, and some Biblical connotations.
We will combine the two before we go on with the passage.

Salt had three useful purposes in the ancient near east.

It preserved food. Since they lived before the age of refrigeration, and
far from any usable ice, they had to preserve their foods by other
means. Salt was the answer to this need.

It seasoned food. Salt adds a great deal of seasoning to almost any
food. Even many dessert recipes contain significant amount of salt.

It served as a fertilizer. Many fertilizers contain salt as a major
ingredient.

We find a fourth purpose in the modern world: traction for roads. It was
not needed in ice-free Israel.

Salt was a part of the ritual plan for Israel, Leviticus 2:13, “Every
grain offering of yours, moreover, you shall season with salt, so that
the salt of the covenant of your God shall not be lacking from your
grain offering; with all your offerings you shall offer salt.”

Numbers 18:19 provides the interpretation for the inclusion of salt in
the Levitical offerings, “All the offerings of the holy gifts, which the
sons of Israel offer to the Lord, I have given to you and your sons and
your daughters with you, as a perpetual allotment. It is an everlasting
covenant of salt before the Lord to you and your descendants with you.”

Obviously, the preservative power of salt is emphasized in this
covenant.

Salt therefore represents the faithfulness and integrity of God in
standing behind His covenants with Israel.

2. 2 Chronicles 13:5 confirms this very thing, “Do you not know that the
Lord God of Israel gave the rule over Israel forever to David and his
sons by a covenant of salt?”

Christ uses the term twice in Mark 9:49-50, “For everyone will be salted
with fire. Salt is good; but if the salt becomes unsalty, with what will
you make it salty again? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with
one another.”

Salted with fire is a reference to salt as a seasoning. Salted with fire
refers to undeserved suffering for blessing. Undeserved suffering
seasons the believer - i.e., makes him better.

The second use is a reference to doctrine as a seasoning in the heart of
the believer. Only doctrine can cause unity among Christians.

Paul also uses it in Colossians 4:6 as a symbol for seasoning, “Let your
speech always be with grace, seasoned, as it were, with salt, so that
you may know how you should respond to each person.”

Salt represents the tailoring of the words of the personal evangelist,
so that each time the gospel is given it is unique.

This method is far superior to the dissemination of gospel tracts,
because the message is personalized, and accounts for whatever the
individual may need to hear as a part of the presentation.

Now when Christ told His hearers that they were the salt of the earth,
He meant that they were the seasoning for it. Their spreading of the
Gospel would bring good to their country, and to the whole world.

Now Christ continues: “but if the salt becomes foolish, how will it be
salty? It is useful for nothing further except when cast outside to be
trampled by men.”

That’s right. Christ said foolish. This is the only reference in all of
ancient Greek literature up to that time where the verb MORAINO
describes a loss of flavor.

There is a reason. Christ wanted to make a connection between cosmic
involvement for the believer and his loss of seasoning power.

Therefore Christ depicts the loss of seasoning power with the verb which
means ‘foolish’.

Your involvement in the cosmic system (Satan’s domain) destroys your
effectiveness in personal evangelism.

The translation is very precise on that point: “if the believer becomes
foolish, how will he be effective in personal evangelism?”

It is noteworthy to point out that the word ‘again’ does not appear in
the original Greek. Although it is often included in English
translations, it skews the meaning of the passage.

Christ is saying precisely this: that your residence in the cosmic
system temporarily destroys your Christian witness. You do not have the
ability to recall doctrine for the purpose of evangelization.

Christ is not saying anything at all about recovery from the cosmic
system, or the lasting effects of cosmic involvement on personal
evangelism.

Note this: when you recover from sin through confession, your ability to
give the gospel is completely restored.

If you have gone a long time in the cosmic system, your arsenal of
doctrines may be well depleted or quite stale, and that also lends
itself to weakness; but! God the Holy Spirit is the power factor in
evangelism through His common grace ministry, and therefore there is no
lack of power in your evangelization.

You are therefore useless to God in the realm of personal evangelism
when you are out of fellowship.

The principle of light, vv.14-16.

Christ begins this passage in the same way as He did the preceding: He
identifies His hearers with the inanimate object of His illustration.

So, His listeners are light. The direct association of the two
technically makes this a metaphor.

Furthermore, they are the light of the world. He employs the noun KOSMOU
as a synonym for GES. This noun still depicts the entire world, and is
definitely not restricted to just Israel.

There is one significant reference to light in the Mosaic Law: it is the
golden lampstand.

Materials: It was made of pure gold.

Description.

It was on the South side of the Holy place.

It was identical to the modern menorah. It had a main shaft which had on
each side three projecting branches.

It had a system of oil-holding cups, which were under each of the lamps.
These cups were shaped like almond blossoms and buds.

Even the wick trimmers and trays were made of pure gold.

Use.

The lampstand was used to light the Holy place.

The incense altar, and the table of showbread were lit by this
lampstand.

Symbology.

Note that this is made of pure gold only. It represented God the Holy
Spirit. There was no wood, and therefore, no humanity.

God the Holy Spirit provides the light for our daily lives. With light,
we have true understanding. Human beings depend very much on sight for
understanding. Light is very necessary for sight.

The light is shed on the table of showbread, and thus the Spirit
provides light for understanding the Word.

The light is shed on the incense altar, and thus the Spirit provides
light for the production of righteousness through the Word.

Note that the Spirit provides light for the life and ministry of Jesus
Christ.

Next, Christ relates the unhideability principle. A city is unable to
hide while laying on a hill. The picture comes to mind of the modern
city with all of its lights lit up at night. As long as that city is on
the hill it cannot be hidden in any way.

This relates to the personal witness of the believer in Jesus Christ.
You are on the hill when you are in fellowship and under the ministry of
God the Holy Spirit.

The city on the hill is fellowship, because this metaphor contrasts the
preceding one with regard to content. Since the preceding one is about
being out of fellowship, and talks about the weakness of the witness of
the one out of fellowship, so this one must be referring to fellowship,
and the strength of the witness of the one in fellowship.

There is also a second illustration with light at its core. The lamp is
a metaphor for the ministry of the Spirit related to personal
evangelism.

Lighting a light is analogous to the moment of salvation for the
believer. It is at that moment that the believer receives the ministry
of the Spirit. The lamp is re-lit each time the believer confesses his
sins.

It is quite foolish to light a lamp and then put it under a cover. To do
so would not only eliminate its true effectiveness, but would shortly
extinguish the lamp through suffocation.

However, if you put a lamp on a lampstand, you make it effective enough
to light everything that is in the house.

This is analogous to the believer who is under the ministry of the
Spirit through fellowship.

Again, your personal witness is nothing without the ministry of the
Spirit, and you must be in fellowship to tap that.

Without the ministry of the Spirit you are completely helpless to use
the doctrines in your soul in the course of a personal evangelism
encounter.

“all that is in the house” Is not a reference to people; this is a
dative plural adjective and definite article combination - PASIN TOIS.
It is instead a reference to things, and so it connects with the
doctrine in the soul of the believer.

The lamp is the Holy Spirit; you light it by maintaining and
re-establishing fellowship.

The Holy Spirit gives light to all that is in the house of your soul. He
uses everything that is there in a witnessing encounter.

The final statement that Christ makes on the subject is in verse 16: “So
let your light shine before men, so that they might behold your good
works and glorify your Father Who is in heaven.”

A very important part of this translation is the meaning of HOUTO.

It denotes that Christ is about to apply his illustration to His
listeners.

It takes the metaphor of the preceding verses and makes it real.

“your light” is of course the ministry of God the Holy Spirit
specifically related to your ‘good works’.

Christ employs the imperative of entreaty to politely communicate a
command. In other words, this is not really an option in the Christian
life.

The ministry of the Spirit in your soul is to shine before men. This
means that you do not stifle that ministry by getting out and staying
out of fellowship.

If you remain in fellowship, the ministry of the Spirit is going to
shine; and good works are going to result.

KALA ERGA is translated ‘good works’. KALA is really a weaker word for
good. AGATHOS is the usual word for good manufactured from spirituality.

However, it is the right word for describing outward beauty, so it is
appropriate here.

Works of outward beauty or good can be many: anything that you do under
the power of the Spirit can be a part of this classification.

Works of Christian service, including the function of your spiritual
gift; charity; service related to citizenship.

Anything you do that imitates the character of God.

The point is that these works of outward good are visible before men.

This is not something that you must try to do! This is simply what
happens when you are under the doctrinal guidance of God the Holy
Spirit.

You must not be shy when given the opportunity to let your light shine.
To do so is to reject the authority of God the Holy Spirit, and that
means sin.

Lighting your light and displaying it for all to see has a purpose: it
is so that men might glorify your Father Who is in heaven.

Men glorify God by believing in Jesus Christ.

Men glorify God by fulfilling His plan.

Christ and the Law of Moses
---------------------------

The General Policy of Law in the Kingdom; Christ and the Law of Moses

Matthew 5:17-20

Translation.

“17 Do not assume that I came to destroy the law or the prophets; I came
not to destroy but to fulfill. 18 For truly I say to you until heaven
and earth pass away certainly not one jot nor one tittle will pass away
from the Law, not until everything happens. 19 Therefore whoever might
destroy the least one of these commandments and so teach men, he will be
called the least in the kingdom of heaven. But whoever might do and
teach, this one will be called great in the kingdom of heaven. 20 For I
say to you that if your righteousness does not greatly exceed that of
the Scribes and Pharisees, you will definitely not enter into the
kingdom of heaven.”

Outline.

Christ’s relationship with the Law of Moses: the general principle,
v.17.

The lasting endurance of the Law, v.18.

Man’s responsibility to the Law, v.19.

The status of the destroyers of the Law.

The status of the keepers of the Law.

The value of the Law related to salvation, v.20.

Exposition.

“17 Do not assume that I came to destroy the law or the prophets; I came
not to destroy but to fulfill.”

Christ had already been the target of opposition from the Pharisees;
some of the things He had said were revolutionary. Many began to assume
that He was going to destroy the Law.

Because of this, He had to make clear the relationship of His ministry
to the Law.

Christ did not come to destroy the law or the prophets.

The freedom code, or the ten commandments was retained entirely.

The spiritual, or the rituals, was retained in content, although the
outward form of the ritual was dropped.

The establishment code remained intact, although it would be expanded to
include mental attitude sins.

Christ fulfilled the Law and the prophets.

There are hundreds of Messianic prophecies which have been fulfilled by
Christ.

Christ fulfilled the prophetic elements of the Law, i.e., the Passover
ritual.

Christ also fulfilled the ten commandments by keeping them perfectly
throughout His life. He was the one human being with the greatest
personal liberty of all time.

And He did it under great personal persecution.

The ten commandments work regardless of personal circumstance. The truth
will make you free.

Christ was the greatest citizen of all time, and fulfilled His
citizenship to His home nation, which was Rome.

“18 For truly I say to you until heaven and earth pass away certainly
not one jot nor one tittle will pass away from the Law, not until
everything happens.”

There are two clues in this verse as to the durability of the Law:

First, it will outlast heaven and earth - the physical universe plus
heaven itself. Heaven and earth pass away at the end of the millennium
and the final judgment of unbelievers at the great white throne.
Revelation 21:1, “Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first
heaven and the first earth had passed away, and there was no longer any
sea.”

Second it will not pass away until everything happens, that is, every
event of human history must come to pass before the Law passes away.

The jot is from the Greek IOTA, the smallest letter of the Greek
alphabet. The Hebrew equivalent would have been the YODH.

A tittle is from KERAIA, which is literally horn. It represents any
little mark of the Hebrew writing system, including punctuation marks
and vowel points.

This is a hyperbole used to communicate that not the smallest part of
the Law will be eliminated.

The truth of the Law will never pass away:

God will always be as He is revealed through the Law, for He never
changes.

In the same way, sin will always be sin. If God never changes, then
neither does the nature of sin.

Likewise, the gospel never changes - Christ is the savior for all
dispensations.

The Law communicates many dispensational constants; however, the form of
the teaching may change without changing the actual truth that is
taught.

Although the truth that is communicated in the Law will never pass away,
the ritual system which teaches that truth already has.

“19 Therefore whoever might destroy the least one of these commandments
and so teach men, he will be called the least in the kingdom of heaven.
But whoever might do and teach, this one will be called great in the
kingdom of heaven.”

This verse contains two simple principles related to the application of
the durability of the Mosaic Law.

If you destroy the least one of these commandments, and so teach men,
you will be called the least in the kingdom of heaven.

The Greek word LUO is translated here ‘destroy’. The original word means
to loose or untie something.

You personally destroy one of the commandments of the Law when you
consider it as not binding to you; or when you no longer accept it as an
authority over your life.

Personal destruction means that you do not mold your life to Scripture
but rather mold Scripture to your life. That is, you begin to change
Scripture as a rationalization for your failures.

This is for believers; unbelievers never enter the kingdom of heaven. To
be the least in the kingdom of heaven is to be completely without reward
at the judgment seat of Christ.

It is one thing to destroy a commandment in your soul; it is a much more
severe thing to become the devil’s ambassador. If you teach the
destruction of the truth of the Law, then you are the devil’s
ambassador.

However, if you are one to do and teach the Law, then you will be called
great.

If you do it, it means that you believe it.

If you believe it enough to do it, then you may go on to teach it. If
you go on to teach, it means you are an ambassador for it.

If you are an ambassador for the Law, then you will be called great in
the kingdom, that is you will receive your full reward.

“20 For I say to you that if your righteousness does not greatly exceed
that of the Scribes and Pharisees, you will definitely not enter into
the kingdom of heaven.”

The explanatory conjunction GAR points to what has gone previously in
the passage. In other words, Christ now explains what He has just said.

Christ injects this here so that He can cover a point that He has yet to
cover: it is the case of entrance into the kingdom of heaven. Up to this
point Christ has only considered the case of the believer, that is, the
one who is already in the kingdom of heaven. Now He has to go back and
tell His audience how to get in the kingdom in the first place.

Christ illustrates the need for grace by means of the negative
illustration.

You can only enter the kingdom of heaven if your righteousness exceeds
that of the Scribes and Pharisees.

From the human viewpoint, the Scribes and Pharisees had the all time
record for righteousness produced by human power and intellect.

Only if your righteousness exceeds that of the all time record will you
enter into the kingdom of heaven.

What better way to communicate the necessity for grace in salvation than
a backhand compliment toward the enemies of Christ?

Christ employs the double negative OU ME. This leaves absolutely no room
for doubt concerning the matter. This is a dogmatic and absolute
negation.

The Law in the Kingdom of Christ
--------------------------------

Matthew 5:21-48

Introduction.

The bulk of this passage has to do with laws of divine establishment.
Christ’s spiritual code is the beatitudes; He now announces His
establishment code.

The foundation for this entire passage lies with the four preceding
verses.

In other words, whatever Christ says about the Law in verses 21-48, it
is not about breaking a jot or tittle of it. This discourse is not about
changes to the substantial truth of the Law.

There will be no change to the definitions of sin. Not in any way. There
could not be if God is immutable.

There will be no change to the punishment for violations of
establishment laws. The punishment for murder is still a life for a
life, with no exception.

Therefore, Christ’s discourse here does not introduce a new morality. He
does not invent a new category of sin which is the mental attitude sin.
He does not!

2 Samuel 11:1-5, “Then it happened in the spring, at the time when kings
go out to battle, that David sent Joab and his servants with him and all
Israel, and they destroyed the sons of Ammon and besieged Rabbah. But
David stayed at Jerusalem. Now when evening came David arose from his
bed and walked around on the roof of the king’s house, and from the roof
he saw a woman bathing; and the woman was very beautiful in appearance.
So David sent and inquired about the woman. And one said, ‘is this not
Bathsheba, the daughter Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite:’ And David
sent messengers and took her, and when she came to him, he lay with her;
and when she had purified herself from her uncleanness, she returned to
her house. And the woman conceived, and she sent and told David, and
said, ‘I am pregnant’.”

The time is one year after the death of David’s father, Nahash, king of
the Ammonites. David became incensed at the rejection of his consolation
by the recognized sons of Nahash, and so he made war against them (2
Samuel 10).

Remember that Joab is David’s nephew, and actually a grandson of Nahash
by Zeruiah, David’s sister by birth.

“Then it happened in the spring, at the time when kings go out to
battle…” Although David had commanded his army to many victories, and
was still a relatively young man, he refused to personally lead his army
against the Ammonites. The reason is simple: he knew his revenge
motivation against this nation was wrong, and that to destroy them from
a personal vendetta was even worse.

David lacked the courage of his convictions, and worse, he sent a man to
make war against his own grandfather.

This in itself points to the appropriate nature of Absalom’s revolt.

God’s discipline is always perfectly appropriate: because of David’s sin
here, Absalom his own son revolted against him.

Having sent to destroy by warfare his own biological family, and having
done so from illicit motives, David paces his roof nervously and there
sees a beautiful woman in the act of bathing.

What better way to pass the time than a conquest of his own?

When David discovers that this woman is the Jewish wife of a Gentile
warrior, his revenge motivation becomes greater and greater. David does
not want this woman because of her beauty, but because she represents
everything that David ever hated, including his own mother.

So David chooses to sin the identical sin of his biological father so as
to satisfy the lust for revenge in his soul. While his troops fight the
war at the front, David fights the war at home, exacting something
appropriate in his mind.

The woman conceives, and tells David of the problem.

David has the perfect solution: he plans to hide his sin by bringing her
husband back home. Any soldier knows that this will result in an amorous
reunion (vv.6-8)!

But Uriah is a true leader of men, and will not take time with his wife
while his men are still fighting in the field (vv.9-13).

So David has to silence the man, so that he can perpetrate his lie and
cover his adulterous affair.

David arranges for Uriah’s death in battle, and Uriah is indeed killed
by the Ammonites (vv.14-25).

David has a visit by Nathan the prophet, who predicts the death of his
child, and the coming revolt from his own royal family.

David then produces the fifty first Psalm, a Psalm of confession he
confession his sin with Bathsheba, and worships God.

However, 2 Samuel 12:21-23 reveals David’s disingenuous nature at this
time, “Then his servants said to him, ‘What is this thing that you have
done? While the child was alive, you fasted and wept; but when the child
died, you arose and ate food.’ And he said, ‘While the child was still
alive, I fasted and wept; for I said, Who knows, the Lord may be
gracious to me, that the child may live. But now he has died; why should
I fast? Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he will not
return to me.’”

This is wrong. First, David disbelieved the prophet Nathan, who revealed
the unchanging Word of God to him. That David should hope against the
divine decree and reject the authority of God’s appointed prophet shows
that he has yet to recover.

Second, David puts on the outward form of repentance in order to get
something from God, and when it does not work, he abandons it. This is
utter hypocrisy, and reveals that David still remains in the cosmic
system.

David then marries Bathsheba after her period of morning, and the child
is born and then dies. David’s discipline has only begun.

Joab finally wins victory in the siege of Rabbah, the capital of Ammon,
and holds off until David can arrive to apply the coup de grace and thus
take credit for the victory. David brings with him all the people of
Israel. All the people.

David dashes to Rabbah and does the deed like the evil man he has
become. 2 Samuel 12:29-30 is worth our time, “So David gathered all the
people and went to Rabbah, fought against it, and captured it. Then he
took the crown of their king from his head; and its weight was a talent
of gold, and in it was a precious stone; and it was place on David’s
head. And he brought out the spoil of the city in great amounts.”

David ends his revenge by enslaving the captives of Rabbah, which is
recorded in verse 31, “He also brought out the people who were in it,
and set them to labor at saws, iron picks, and iron axes, and made them
pass by the brick mold. And thus he did to all the cities of the sons of
Ammon. Then David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.”

Note: the NASB version tries to indicate that David had the Ammonites
tortured and killed; this is incorrect by the original Hebrew, which can
be confusing.

The key to the original Hebrew is the word MALBEN, which is erroneously
translated ‘brick kilns’. It should be brick mold…

Now if this does not illustrate the existence of mental attitude sin
before the Sermon on the Mount, then nothing does. However, there are
many other passages that function in this way.

Genesis 6:5, “…his heart was evil continually.”

Psalm 14:1, “The fool has said in his heart ‘There is no God’.”

Jeremiah 17:9, “The heart is more deceitful than all else and is
desperately sick; who can understand it?”

The first section, verses 21-26, “21 You heard that it was said to the
ancients, ‘You will not commit murder’: and, ‘whoever murders, will be
guilty before the court.’ 22 But I say to you that everyone who is angry
with his brother will be guilty before the court; and whoever says to
his brother, ‘Raka’ will be guilty before the Sanhedrin; and whoever
says, ‘Fool’ will be guilty unto the Gehenna of the Fire. 23 Therefore
if you are presenting your gift upon the altar and there remember that
your brother has something against you, 24 leave your gift there before
the altar and go first to be reconciled with your brother, and then
after coming back present your gift. 25 Come to be like-minded with your
adversary at law quickly, during what time you are with him on the way,
so that the adversary might never give you over to the judge, and the
judge to the bailiff, and you might be thrown into prison. 26 Truly I
say to you, you will definitely not come out of there, until you have
paid the last penny.”

The outline:

The ancient Law of Moses concerning murder and its penalty, v.21.

The extension of the penalty of murder for mental and verbal sins, v.22.

The application to the realm of priorities, vv.23-24.

The hopelessness of fighting the court of Christ, vv.25-26.

The ancient Law of Moses concerning murder and its penalty, v.21, “You
heard that it was said to the ancients, ‘You will not commit murder’:
and, ‘whoever murders, will be guilty before the court.’”

Christ quotes from one passage, and then compiles a couple of concepts
from several sources.

Christ quotes from the ten commandments, out of Exodus 20:13 and
Deuteronomy 5:17.

Then He puts together some other things:

The Lex Talionis, Leviticus 24:17-20, “And if a man takes the life of
any human being, he shall surely be put to death. And the one who takes
the life of an animal shall make it good, life for life. And if a man
injures his neighbor, just as he has done, so it shall be done to him:
fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; just as he has
injured a man, so it shall be inflicted on him.”

The need for jurisprudence through the courts, Deuteronomy 16:18, “You
shall appoint for yourself judges and officers in all your towns which
the Lord your God is giving you, according to your tribes, and they
shall judge the people with righteous judgment.”

Christ has a point. First that not one jot nor one tittle will not pass
from the Law; and second, that the Law has certain provisions concerning
the act of murder, namely, the provision of capital punishment after the
conduct of proper jurisprudence.

The extension of the penalty for murder to mental and verbal sins, verse
22, “But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother will
be guilty before the court; and whoever says to his brother, ‘Raka’ will
be guilty before the Sanhedrin; and whoever says, ‘Fool’ will be guilty
unto the Gehenna of the Fire.”

The key word of the entire verse is ENOCHOS, which means liable to a
penalty of the Law, or guilty.

There are three tiers to the verse with regard to the courts:

The court is the regular court of law, or the local court, from the
Greek word KRISIS; the equivalent would be the city or county court.

The SANHEDRIN is equal to the supreme court of any nation. It was the
most powerful court of the Jews, and Christ’s hearers would identify it
as the highest legal authority in Judaea.

There is of course the highest court of all, and that is the court of
the Gehenna of the Fire.

The locality of Gehenna was in Jerusalem, and Jeremiah 19:5-6 identifies
this place as the final place for the administration of the fifth cycle
of discipline on the nation, “They have built the high places of Baal to
burn their sons in the fire as offerings to Baal - something I did not
command or mention, nor did it enter my mind. So beware, the days are
coming, declares the Lord, when the people will no longer call this
place Topheth or the Valley of Ben Hinnom, but the Valley of Slaughter.”

It was the place of child sacrifice, and the fire is the identification
with the burning fires of sacrifice to Baal.

It would become the place where the Jews were slaughtered for their sins
by the final attack of the Babylonian armies.

Therefore this represents the administration of the fifth cycle of
discipline when the supreme court of heaven steps in and rules because
of the failure of the nation to take hold of the delegated authority
through the laws of divine establishment and punish their own criminal
offenders.

At each tier, there is a crime that is liable for the penalty for
murder.

At the local court level, there will be trials for those who are angry
with their brothers. 1. The Greek present participle is ORGIZOMENOS,
which denotes a present state of judgmental wrath.

Mental attitude judgmental wrath is the seed from which all murder
grows. When one man murders another it is the ultimate and final
expression of judgment.

In the millennium, with the world under the rule of Jesus Christ, and
the devil incarcerated in Hades, the mental attitude sin of ultimate
judgment will result in capital punishment!

The reason for this is simple: there is no overt sin of murder that is
not preceded by the mental attitude sin of murder.

Capital punishment is truly a preventative for any sin for which it is a
penalty.

Therefore, if capital punishment is extended back to the mental attitude
sin part of murder, many more, in fact the vast, vast majority of
murders will be prevented. All overt sins start in the soul. If they are
stopped there, then far fewer will come to fruit.

This is one of the conditions for the fantastic, ideal conditions of the
millennium.

In the millennium, there will be thought police.

The reason that there can be no establishment punishment for mental
attitude and verbal sins before the millennium is the inevitable
distortion and abuse of jurisprudence that would come about due to the
cosmic deceptions of the devil’s world.

10. With a ruler who knows the thoughts and intents of the heart
perfectly, with a perfect judge, there is no distortion of
jurisprudence.

11. John the apostle understood this clearly (see 1 John 3:11-15
addenda).

At the human supreme court level, the one who says ‘Raka’ to his brother
will be guilty unto capital punishment; guilty as for murder.

RAKA comes from an Aramaic word, REQA, which means ‘empty-headed fool’.
This is a pretty vindictive and vitriolic version of verbal sin.

This is a verbalization of judgment from one person to another; it is
the verbal expression of the mental attitude judgment. It leads to a
murder conviction in a higher court.

This verbalization of judgment is construed to the crime of murder; it
is the verbal equivalent of ORGIZOMENOS.

The verbalization of any mental attitude sin is quite an advance in
severity. It is a sin which will be liable to the appeal courts, and of
course the courts of Christ’s kingdom are perfectly efficient. If you
are guilty, you will be found guilty.

At the level of the supreme court of heaven, whoever says ‘fool’ will be
guilty unto the Gehenna of the Fire.

The first thing to notice is the exclusion of a target for the epithet.
Christ leaves it out for the sake of brevity, but it is intended to be
‘brother’.

The word MORE easily translates into the English ‘moron’. It is the
Greek equivalent of RAKA.

The preposition EIS controls the phrase ‘the Gehenna of the Fire’. This
simply shows that this is the limit for all judgment; that the Gehenna
of the Fire is the final court.

Summary of this verse.

See SLANDER addendum.

Mental attitude or verbal judgment, especially blanket judgment, will be
liable to the harshest of penalties in the millennium.

This harsh penalty of capital punishment will be one of the primary
reasons for the ideal conditions of the millennium. With a strict limit
on mental attitude and verbal sin, that vast majority of strife that
characterizes planet earth under Satan will be gone.

Fear not! With Satan and the fallen angels bound, there will be very
little temptation from the world. Perfect environment reduces
temptation! There will be no such thing as peer pressure at this time!

The combination of the rule of Christ and the incarceration of the devil
will keep temptation to an absolute minimum; there will be few instances
of capital punishment.

The application to the realm of priorities, vv.23-24, “Therefore if you
are presenting your gift upon the altar and there remember that your
brother has something against you, 24 leave your gift there before the
altar and go first to be reconciled with your brother, and then after
coming back present your gift.”

Now this verse does not regard the subject as sinful; on the contrary,
the brother is the one who is sinful, and the subject is the one who has
a responsibility to save him.

When you have a wrathful mental attitude, you have something against
someone; when you say RAKA to someone, you have something against that
person; even when you just say MORON, there is judgment against another.

Now if you are worshipping God, and you remember not that you have
mentally or verbally judged someone else, but rather that someone else
might have a reason to mentally or verbally judge you, it is time to
temporarily interrupt your worship.

Being reconciled with your brother means that you must resolve the case
he might have against you. If you have done something wrong to your
brother, if he might be tempted to judge you, you must resolve the
matter.

The grave consequences of such things in the millennium is enough so
that you would want to interrupt your worship to take care of things.

The application during the church age is less so than during the
millennium, but James 5:16 still applies: “Confess your sins to each
other and pray for each other so that you may be healed.”

The hopelessness of fighting the court, vv.25-26: “25 Come to be
like-minded with your adversary at law quickly, during what time you are
with him on the way, so that the adversary might never give you over to
the judge, and the judge to the bailiff, and you might be thrown into
prison. 26 Truly I say to you, you will definitely not come out of
there, until you have paid the last penny.”

These verses remain specific to the subject. That is, they are not
general statements about the conduct of lawsuits, but specific to
inevitability of justice in the millennium.

In other words, they are spoken by Christ with a gleam in His eye.

The adversary is none other than Christ Himself, and the time you are
with Him on the way is the time that you have while you are on planet
earth.

Since the context takes the process of the court all the way to the
Supreme Court of Heaven, the ultimate judge and lawgiver is present in
this passage.

Since the subject of the passage is the crowd, and Christ has made the
crowd into suspects, the adversary is Christ Himself.

Christ urges his listeners to get to know their adversary at Law on the
way to the courts.

The courts here are the courts of eternity.

The Judgment Seat of Christ, the evaluation of all Church Age believers.

The baptism of fire, which is the judgment of all unbelievers of the
tribulation, both Jew and Gentile, Mt 25:31-46; Ezek 20:33-48.

The evaluation of all tribulational believers, both Jew and Gentile, Mt
25:31-46; Dan 12:2-3.

At the great white throne, there are three categories of judgments.

The judgment of believers.

All believers who lived before the incarnation, both Jew and Gentile,
are judged at this time.

All Millennial believers are judged at this time.

The judgment of unbelievers. All unbelievers in history, except those of
the tribulation, are judged at this time. Mt 25:3146, Ezek 20:3238, Rev
20:7-10.

The judgment of all fallen angels at the end of the Millennium. Their
sentence was passed before time began, but its execution is not carried
out until the end of human history.

Christ commands us to become like minded with Him on the way to our
eternal judgment. The Greek participle is EUNOON, which describes mental
compatibility, comradeship, and even friendship.

Coming to a like-minded state with Christ can only be accomplished
through the faith perception of the truth.

The Bible is the mind of Christ (1 Corinthians 2:16). It is through our
study of God’s word that we become like-minded with the Son of God,
Jesus Christ.

It is easy to see the wisdom in the fulfillment of this command.

Since Christ is our final judge, the final judge of all mankind, it is
imperative to become like-minded with Him on the way to our final
judgment.

If you are like-minded with your final judge, your final judgment is
certain to go well.

The command to become like-minded with the adversary at Law is
especially pertinent because judgment from the Supreme Court of Heaven
will be characterized by perfect justice, and by its finality.

Being thrown into jail is the equivalent of eternal condemnation, and no
one will escape there until they have paid the last penny.
Unfortunately, there is no money in hell, and no way to obtain any.

Christ finishes the discourse with the principle of the inescapability
of hell.

The second section, verses 27-30: “27 You heard that it was said, ‘Do
not commit adultery’. 28 But I say to you that everyone who looks at a
woman to desire her has already committed adultery with her in his
heart. 29 Now if your right eye causes you to stumble, snatch it out and
throw it from you. For it is better for you that one of your members be
destroyed and not your whole body be cast unto Gehenna. 30 And if your
right hand causes you to stumble, cut it off and throw it from you. For
it is better for you that one of your members be destroyed and not your
whole body be thrown out into Gehenna.”

Again Christ begins with a statement from the ten commandments, this one
from Exodus 20:14 and Deuteronomy 5:18.

And again, His intent is not to destroy the Law, for nothing is to pass
from the Law until the very end of human history.

But once again, Christ is going to extend the penalty into the realm of
the mental attitude. He does so with some harsh standards.

He uses the phrase, ‘everyone who looks at a woman to desire her.’

The use of PROS plus the infinitive mood indicates purpose. Here it is
PROS plus the infinitive mood of EPITHUMEO, which means ‘to desire’
something.

EPITHUMEO goes beyond a simple acknowledgement of attractiveness.

It describes a legitimate desire to enjoy the charms of the thing or
person admired.

So in Christ’s kingdom, you can look at another woman, but you cannot do
so with the intent of desire.

If the purpose in you heart is desire, then you have already committed
adultery in your heart.

It is easy and appropriate to apply some of the principles from the
preceding passage.

If mental attitude murder caused one to be guilty before the courts, and
incurred the appropriate penalty, then so also would mental attitude
adultery.

So it does. And the penalty for adultery from the establishment code is
clear:

Leviticus 20:10, “If there is a man who commits adultery with another
man’s wife, one who commits adultery with his friend’s wife, the
adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.”

Deuteronomy 22:23-24, “If there is a girl who is a virgin engaged to a
man, and another man finds her in the city and lies with her, then you
shall bring them both out to the gate of that city and you shall stone
them to death; the girl, because she did not cry out in the city, and
the man, because he has violated his neighbor’s wife.”

So what Christ does here is extend the penalty for adultery into the
mental attitude realm. It is important to note that although Christ does
not mention guilt before the courts, it is clear that He intends it so.

Also the principle of the stumbling block applies to adultery.

No man or woman should do what might encourage adulterous thoughts in
the other.

This includes what is spoken, or what is worn (or what is not worn).

Of course, exercise common sense; it is not necessary for women to wear
a beer barrel or a tent, and our society is now so degenerate that even
moderate prudence in clothing is enough.

Christ also adds something here that is appropriate to the battle
against mental attitude sin during the millennium: “29 Now if your right
eye causes you to stumble, snatch it out and throw it from you. For it
is better for you that one of your members be destroyed and not your
whole body be cast unto Gehenna. 30 And if your right hand causes you to
stumble, cut it off and throw it from you. For it is better for you that
one of your members be destroyed and not your whole body be thrown out
into Gehenna.”

Christ depicts a swift and violent act in the snatching out of the eye
and throwing it from you; He preaches immediate action.

This is not recommended action for the church age; there is some
application here, but not the same kind of violence is required.

The casting of the body unto Gehenna is the casting of the human body,
not the resurrection body. The use of the word SOMA here restricts the
interpretation of GEHENNA to a receptacle for the human body.

See the doctrine of burial and cremation.

When a body was cast into Gehenna, it was a clear indication that
capital punishment had taken place.

Therefore, during Christ’s millennial rule, capital punishment will
extend to the mental realm for the sin of adultery.

Although there is no straight application to the plucking out of an eye
or the cutting off of a hand, there is a common sense application to
life in the church age.

If there is something that is a source of temptation to sin of any kind,
especially if your willpower has been weakened by cosmic involvement,
then you must be separated from that thing.

The epistles confirm this principle.

1 Corinthians 6:18, “Flee immorality. Every other sin that a man commits
is outside the body, but the immoral man sins against his own body.”

1 Corinthians 10:14, “Therefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry.”

2 Timothy 2:22, “Now flee from youthful lusts, and pursue righteousness,
faith, love and peace, with those who call on the Lord from a pure
heart.”

Titus 3:3, “For we also once were foolish ourselves, disobedient,
deceived, enslaved to various lusts and pleasures, spending our life in
malice and envy, hateful, hating one another.”

1 Peter 2:11, “Beloved, I urge you as aliens and strangers to abstain
from fleshly lusts, which wage war against the soul.”

1 Peter 4:1-3, “Therefore, since Christ has suffered in the flesh, arm
yourselves also with the same purpose, because he who has suffered in
the flesh has ceased from sin. so as to live the rest of the time in the
flesh no longer for the lusts of men, but for the will of God. For the
time already past is sufficient for you to have carried out the desire
of the Gentiles, having pursued a course of sensuality, lusts,
drunkenness, carousals, drinking parties and abominable idolatries.”

Furthermore, there is the principle of degenerating susceptibility: the
more you give in to sin, the more susceptible to sin that you become.

The greater sins breed the lesser sins.

The lesser sins increase the chance that a greater sin might be
committed. And a greater sin may include something that is truly a
capital crime even in our society!

Romans 1:18-32 contains the doctrine of degeneracy and the principle of
degenerating susceptibility. Three times in this passage Paul employs
the phrase “God gave them over”.




Rom 1:18-19, "The wrath of God is being revealed from heaven against all
the godlessness and wickedness of men who suppress the truth by their
wickedness, {19} since what may be known about God is plain to them,
because God has made it plain to them.

This is the statement of the subject matter of the following passage.

The wrath of God is the expression of His justice in Divine discipline.

The revelation of God’s wrath is not mentioned - perhaps it could be the
AIDS virus in ancient times.

The reason for the wrath of God is plain - people have suppressed the
truth of God in their own souls through their involvement in the cosmic
system.

{20} For since the creation of the world God’s invisible qualities–his
eternal power and divine nature–have been clearly seen, being understood
from what has been made, so that men are without excuse.

{21} For although they knew God, they neither glorified him as God nor
gave thanks to him, but their thinking became a vacuum and their foolish
hearts were darkened.

This is a clear reference to bitterness, rejection of the truth, the
acceptance of the cosmic counterfeits and lies, and spiritual blindness.

These people are believers.

{22} Although they claimed to be wise, they became fools {23} and
exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images made to look like
mortal man and birds and animals and reptiles. {24} Therefore God gave
them over in the sinful desires of their hearts to sexual impurity for
the degrading of their bodies with one another.

These verses clearly refer to the lust pattern and addiction cycle, with
emphasis on the category of stimulation lust.

In verse 24, the word paradidomi indicates that God gives these people
over for the purpose of discipline.

The discipline is built in to their acts: atimazo indicates that people
in this category of lust mistreat and degrade the bodies of those with
whom they engage in their activities. This becomes mutual and
inescapable.

“{25}They exchanged the truth of God for a lie, and worshiped and served
created things rather than the Creator–who is forever praised. Amen.
{26} Because of this, God gave them over to shameful lusts. Even their
women exchanged natural relations for unnatural ones. {27} In the same
way the men also abandoned natural relations with women and were
inflamed with lust for one another. Men committed indecent acts with
other men, and received in themselves the due penalty for their
perversion.”

These verses serve as a summary for what has gone before, except with
regard to homosexual activity.

Again, there is built-in Divine discipline for this kind of activity.

However, homosexuality brings on another category of degeneracy
altogether.

{28} Furthermore, since they did not think it worthwhile to retain the
knowledge of God, he gave them over to a depraved mind, to do what ought
not to be done, {29} having become filled with every kind of wickedness,
evil, greed, depravity, full of envy, murder, strife, deceit malice, are
gossips, {30} slanderers, God-haters, insolent, arrogant, boastful; they
invent ways of doing evil; they disobey their parents; {31} they are
senseless, faithless, heartless, ruthless.

A depraved mind is a built-in category of Divine discipline. It is
called adokimon, and it means that the mind no longer has an conscience
related to establishment truth.

A mind without an establishment conscience is a very dangerous thing -
look again at all of the anti-establishment activities.

This long list of sins - all destructive to society, are seen as the
result of the homosexual lust pattern.

Homosexuality is certainly a very strong sin against what is most
obviously natural. It is one of the highest ways to elevate self above
society and family and worst of all God.

The verb paradidomi describes the giving over of these homosexuals to
every kind of sin. a. God produces the action of the verb; the
homosexuals receive it.

This verb means literally ‘to hand over a criminal to the custody of the
law’.

Here, God hands them over to the custody of their flunked-out minds.
adokimon means to fail the grade, or to be so stupid as to be
untestable.

So this is a picture of God leaving homosexual lust pattern idiots to
their own conscience, which is just about gone.

The result of the list is varied:

Some things are worse than homosexuality, like murder. In this case
homosexuality is a step that makes it easier to murder.

Some things are not worse, but still sins, like envy, strife, etc. Once
a really bad thing is done, it is then quite easy to do the less bad.
Homosexuality makes it easier to sin the lesser sins.

Verse 32: “who, full-knowing beforehand the righteous decree of God that
they who currently practice things like this are deserving of capital
punishment, they not only do the same, but also approve of those who
practice them.”

These homosexuals fully know the righteous decree of God. Righteous
decree comes from the Greek word for a commandment that is intrinsically
righteous - that stands on its own merit, and is just in the eyes of
all.

This verse refers back to the homosexuals last named in verse 28.

The relative pronoun hoitines always seeks the nearest antecedent for
its identification, and this would be lust-pattern homosexuals who
produce the long list of sins.

This is because it must either refer to just the last sin in the list,
or the producer of all the sins of 29-31. It is the latter.

It is the aorist participle of epiginosko, to fully know something. The
aorist participle denotes that the knowledge was acquired before the
action - that they knew what the penalty was before they did what they
did.

This applies to those who currently practice such things.

This comes from the present participle of prasson. It means that the
overt act of homosexuality is currently practiced.

‘Such things’ is the articular pronoun toiauta. It should be translated,
‘things like this’. What things? This whole long list? Some of the
things on the list? Or the sin which makes one susceptible to them?

Let’s put this on hold for a moment…

They who practice things like this are deserving of capital punishment.
Now here is something that is clear: axioi thanatou always means
deserving of capital punishment.

Many secular writers of ancient Greek employed this phrase, and always
it was capital punishment.

In Matthew 26:66 and Mark 14:64, the crowd calls for the capital
punishment of Christ, by saying that he deserves death.

In Luke 23:15,22 Pontius Pilate claims that Christ does not deserve
capital punishment.

In Matthew 15:4 and Mark 7:10, Christ brings forward an Old Testament
death penalty, and treats it as valid for the time. That penalty was
death for recalcitrant children, Exodus 21:17.

Matthew 10:21 and Mark 13:12 Christ uses another phrase to show capital
punishment when it is undeserved.

In Acts 23:29, Claudius Lysias says that Paul is not axios thanatou.

In 25:11,25 Paul himself claims the same thing.

Oaths
-----

Matthew 5:33-37, “33 Again you heard that it was said by the ancients,
You will not make false oaths, and, You will make your oaths to the
Lord. 34 But I say to you, make no oath at all, neither by heaven,
because it is the throne of God, 35 nor by earth, because it is the
footstool of His feet, nor into Jerusalem, because it is the city of the
Great King, 36 nor will you make an oath by your head, because you are
not able to make one hair white or black. 37 But let your word be yes,
yes, no, no; and what is beyond these is from the evil one.”

Outline.

The old Mosaic Establishment Code principles.

The principle of making false oaths.

The principle of making oaths to the Lord.

The new Millennial Establishment Code principles.

The prohibition against any oath.

The list of the most common oaths, and the reason for each prohibition.

Heaven.

Earth.

Into Jerusalem.

Your head.

The new command: just say it.

The Explanation.

The context for this passage comes from several Mosaic passages:

Numbers 30:2, “If a man makes a vow to the Lord, or takes an oath to
bind himself with a binding obligation, he shall not violate his word;
he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.”

This verse includes two concepts: making a vow to the Lord, and making
an oath on a binding contract with another human being.

This is an issue where the character of man must imitate the character
of God. God always keeps His word, and for normal function between men,
there must also be the keeping of one’s word.

Making an oath in a human contract, includes making that oath to God, in
imitation of His character. It was rather like taking the oath on the
witness stand in our own culture.

This was the consumer protection clause of the Mosaic Law, and as long
as the people of Israel loved God, they took this seriously.

Deuteronomy 21:21-23, “When you make a vow to the Lord your God, you
shall not delay to pay it, for it would be sin in you, and the Lord your
God will surely require it of you. However, if you refrain from vowing,
it would not be sin in you. You shall be careful to perform what goes
out from your lips, just as you have voluntarily vowed to the Lord you
God, what you have promised.”

Taking a vow to the Lord was a practice whereby someone would swear by
some popular formula to do something for God.

Genesis 28:20-22 contains the oath of Jacob: “Then Jacob made a vow,
saying, ‘If God will be with me and will keep me on this journey that I
take, and will give me food to eat and garments to wear, and I return to
my father’s house in safety, then the Lord will be my God. And this
stone, which I have set up as a pillar, will be God’s house; and of all
that Thou dost give me I will surely give a tenth to Thee.’”

The vow gave an individual an opportunity to imitate God by keeping his
own word.

Leviticus 19:12, “And you shall not swear falsely by My name, so as to
profane the name of your God; I am the Lord.”

This context has a number of miscellaneous commands. This one is in the
midst of them.

It is a simple repetition of the others, but gives a little bit more in
the way of explanation.

Breaking a vow profanes the name of God. It makes God seem common to
unbelievers, because it gives the appearance of a powerless God.

You swear by God’s name and do not keep the oath. So you swear and God
does not give you the power to keep the oath? Such a weak God.

Bible Oaths Include:

Those of judicial procedure, i.e., the oath in the function of law to
determine what is hearsay versus what is evidence.

The oath of allegiance to a sovereign or a superior.

An agreement or stipulation for the performance of an act, Gen 14:22,
24:2.

A vow made in the form of an oath.

A form of oath used frequently in the Bible is “as the Lord lives,”
found in 1 Sam 14:39, 19:6; 2 Sam 15:21; 1 Kg 18:10.

God’s Oath.

Heb 6:16, “For men take an oath by the greater, and to them the oath is
given for a confirmation, and that is the end of all dispute.”

In other words, in resolving anything, from allegiance to jurisprudence,
an oath was used.

To the Jews in Jerusalem in A.D. 67, taking an oath in the name of God
was a well known custom for settling a dispute, to confirm a promise, or
to resolve some problem in court.

Heb 6:17, “By which solemn oath, God, even more willing to demonstrate
to the heirs of the promise the immutability of His decrees, pledged
Himself as a guarantee by an oath.”

God took an oath as a confirmation or guarantee of His promises, of the
validity of Abraham’s escrow blessing. He took an oath that the
blessings were there on deposit. But being God, He couldn’t take an oath
by anyone greater; therefore, He took the oath by Himself.

The first immutable thing is God Himself. The second immutable thing is
God’s promise.

So when God gives a promise, the fact that HE gives it means that
promise carries its own immutability.

The second immutable thing, God’s promise in time, is the revelation of
what God did for you in eternity past.

Again, there are only two immutable things: what God is, and what God
says. God and doctrine are the two immutable things.

God demonstrates to us through doctrine what He did for us in eternity
past. There is no way in our minds and in our thinking that we could
ever come close to penetrating eternity past. Only God knows what He
did, because only He was there. Yet He is willing to demonstrate this to
us with something else that is immutable: He reveals it in His Word.

The person of God the Father as the grantor designed our escrow
blessings. The revelation about God in the Bible is the means of
conveying our escrow blessings to us in time. Why must we have this
information? Because without doctrine, we’re like a ship without a
rudder. We have no true motivation nor any real understanding of how we
glorify God.

God is not only immutable, but He is fair. Therefore, He has revealed to
us these things pertaining to His plan.

God has a perfect, immutable plan for you. To harness your life to the
Immutable is where the blessing and meaning of life begins.

The removal of all oaths for the millennium.

The millennium is a perfect environment, including consumer protection.
There is no need for any oath during the millennium.

Christ names all of the popular oaths: heaven, earth, ‘into Jerusalem’,
and ‘by my head’.

In each case, He notes why the oath does nothing.

Heaven is the throne of God - there is no oath needed there!

Earth is the footstool for Christ’s feet, a clear reference to the
millennium. There is no need for oaths during the millennium!

To Jerusalem was an oath sworn during the festal ascent to the Holy
City. Jerusalem is the city of the Great King… no need for an oath
there.

By my head was another popular oath, but Christ really comes down hard
on this one. He makes a statement of grace orientation: swearing by your
own head has no power at all!

In the millennium, there will be only ‘yes’ or ‘no’ in every dealing.

Anything beyond this is from the evil one.

ADDENDUM: James 5:12, “But before all these, my brothers, do not swear,
neither by heaven nor the earth nor any other oath; but let your yes be
yes and no, no, in order that you might not fall under judgment.”

James considers this very important, because he places it at the top of
his list, even though it is much later in his letter. He says pro pantwn
de, or ‘before all these things’.

He then goes on to paraphrase the sermon on the mount, but he gives a
different conclusion.

This different conclusion means that there is a different reason for
restraining from oaths during the church age.

The reason for the absence of oaths during the millennium has to do with
the ideal conditions of that dispensation. What reason could there be
for one if there is no cosmic system? No active demons?

James’ conclusion is this: i(/na mh( u(po kri/sin pe/shte.

The i(/na is there to denote that this is a purpose clause. The reason
for the prohibition against oaths is about to follow. It is translated
‘in order that’.

pe/shte communicates the idea of a figurative fall; a fall from grace if
you will.

u(po kri/sin denotes judgment. Let’s think this one through. It can be
one of two categories of judgments: either God’s judgment, or man’s.

If this is God’s judgment, then swearing an oath during the church age
could cause you to lose your reward. Very unlikely.

However, if this is man’s judgment, then it certainly makes sense. The
judgment of the state can be harsh indeed, especially in the area of
real estate (boundary agreements) and business contracts.

Since the church age emphasizes the separation of church and state, any
oath that combines church and state is a dangerous one indeed.

If you swear an oath before God to keep a business contract, and then
the devil’s world happens, you are bound to that oath regardless, and it
could wind you up in some very hot water with the state.

James’ prohibition extends to any matter of the state; any matter where
the state could cause you come under its judgment.

Because of this u(po kri/sin, there is a limit to the prohibition. If
you want to swear an oath in another matter, then do not worry about it.

This prohibition does not extend to oaths about telling the truth in the
courtroom, or to the military oath. Neither one of those can cause you
to go to jail if you are an honest person.

Judicial Punishment
-------------------

Introduction.

The Establishment Code of the Mosaic Law contains a system of judicial
punishment for crimes and misdemeanors.

This system is God’s prescription for degenerate man. Perfect God took
into account the shortcomings of man under the sin nature and in the
cosmic system.

God decided to delegate the system to man. That is, to make man
responsible for policing himself.

Whenever God delegates responsibility to man, it is so that man might
gain an appreciation of God.

God does not feel sorry for himself; he does not need our empathy.

However, our empathy helps us to know God, and we are the infinite
gainers.

Furthermore, God allowed Satan control of this world, so that God cannot
adjudicate the troubles of man by Himself. He must wait until the
millennium to do so.

Although God does not administrate justice Himself, He has given man the
responsibility, so that human freedom might be maintained.

Human freedom is the highest priority in the angelic conflict. God
provides for its preservation by means of delegated authority.

When delegated authority fails to punish, God is authorized to step in
and do the job.

God is just to every human being on an individual basis.

God also punishes nations which fail to be responsible in their
appointment to justice.

There is a direct correlation between the nation’s pivot of mature
believers and how well the nation administrates justice.

As the pivot shrinks, so does the administration of justice. Therefore,
God steps in to administrate justice, and preserve freedom through the
cycles of discipline.

The cycles of discipline are designed to wake the nation up to its
failure to please God.

The cycles of discipline also serve in part to administrate justice in
place of the failed justice of the nation.

There are two parts to the Establishment Code related to the
administration of justice:

The corporate administration of justice.

The personal administration of justice.

The Law includes provisions for Israel as a client nation unto God. Any
matter of punishment for spiritual impropriety was specifically because
of Israel’s corporate testimony during that dispensation.

Since there is now separation of church and state, the punishments for
spiritual impropriety are no longer a part of the establishment code.

These punishments are included in this doctrine only for the sake of
completeness and historical heritage. Their inclusion is not to imply
their implementation for this dispensation.

In conclusion, the Mosaic Law provides the model for the administration
of justice in the devil’s world. Any nation may employ it with
confidence that it will bear the fruits of domestic peace and
prosperity. Leviticus 26:3-6, “If you walk in My statutes and keep My
commandments so as to carry them out, then I shall give you rains in
their season, so that the land will yield its produce and the trees of
the field will bear their fruit. Indeed, your threshing will last for
you until grape gathering, and grape gathering will last until sowing
time. You will thus eat your food to the full and live securely in your
land. I shall also grant peace in the land, so that you may lie down
with no one making you tremble. I shall also eliminate harmful beasts
from the land, and no sword will pass through your land.”

The acceptability of the Mosaic Establishment Code correlates directly
to the pivot.

The greater the pivot, the more acceptable this code will be, and vice
versa.

Relationship with God makes this covenant of laws a good thing to the
people.

Employment of this set of laws causes a national testimony, Leviticus
26:11-12, “[If you walk in My statutes and keep My commandments so as to
carry them out…] …I will make My dwelling among you, and My soul will
not reject you. I will also walk among you and be your God, and you
shall be My people.”

Obedience does not bring relationship with God, but relationship with
God brings obedience.

Obedience does result in testimony, and obedience on a national scale
does bring international impact.

However, this is not the dispensation of corporate testimony, so that
this function is limited.

The Corporate Administration of Justice.

The rules of jurisprudence.

For ANY sin to be considered true, there must be at least two
eyewitnesses to the act, and usually the Bible prefers three -
Deuteronomy 17:6: “On the oral testimony of two witnesses or three
witnesses, he who is to die shall be put to death; he shall not be put
to death on the oral testimony of one witness.”

If you are the only eyewitness to an act, you cannot come to the
conclusion that what you saw is true; the requirement for two witnesses
testifies to the untrustable nature of your senses, and to the sin
nature in man.

Again, you are not allowed to conclude that a sin has transpired.

The Bible does not make much room for the use of physical or
circumstantial evidence; eyewitnesses are required. This is the key to a
speedy trial.

Therefore, if there is insufficient evidence, you must leave the matter
to the supreme court of heaven.

Guilty pleas require no eyewitnesses.

False witness is the submission of evidence or testimony in a court of
law, which is known by the witness to be false at the time that he gives
it.

The evidence or testimony may be of any make-up - oral, written, or even
physical. Exodus 20:16; Deuteronomy 5:20: “You shall not bear false
witness against your neighbor.”

The penalty for false witness is commensurate with the accusation; it
goes all the way to capital punishment - Deuteronomy 19:15-21: “A single
witness shall not rise up against a man on account of any iniquity or
any sin which he has committed; on the oral testimony of two or three
witnesses a matter shall be confirmed. If a malicious witness rises up
against a man to accuse him of wrongdoing, then both the men who have
the dispute shall stand before the Lord, before the priests and the
judges who will be in office in those days. And the judges shall
investigate thoroughly; and if the witness is a false witness and he has
accused his brother falsely, then you shall do to him just as he had
intended to do to his brother. Thus you shall purge the evil from among
you. And the rest will hear and be afraid, and will never again do such
an evil thing among you. Thus you shall not show pity: life for life,
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.”

Similar to false witness is the refusal to testify.

The refusal to testify is a serious matter in the legal context of
Israel. If a witness knows the truth, but refuses to speak under oath,
he has done something tantamount to false witness.

The one who refused to testify was considered an accessory to the crime,
and was punishable as such.

Prov 29:24: “He who is a partner with a thief hates his own life; He
hears the oath but tells nothing.”

Lev 5:1: “Now if a person sins, after he hears a public adjuration to
testify, when he is a witness, whether he has seen or otherwise known,
if he does not tell it, then he will bear his guilt.”

The punishments.

Offenses requiring capital punishment:

Striking or cursing a parent, Exodus 21:15,17. The strike must be with
intent to cause violent harm, which is the meaning of NAKAH. The curse
is a severe verbal reviling.

Blasphemy, which is cursing the name of God - the verbal expression of
extreme bitterness, Leviticus 24:14,16,23; 1 Kings 21:13. This is not
simply taking the Lord’s name in vain. Interestingly, this was the
charge brought against Christ for which He was crucified.

Profaning the Sabbath, Exodus 31:14f; 35:2; Numbers 15:32-36.

‘Profane’ comes from the Hebrew verb HALAL.

HALAL means to violate in a sexual sense. It is also employed to denote
someone who is impure because they have touched the dead.

The Sabbath was Holy because it was the appointed time to spend with
God. All concentration on the Sabbath day was to be directed toward Him.

Doing something on the Sabbath that was a distraction from learning
about and worshipping God was tantamount to blasphemy, and considered a
capital offense.

Witchcraft and False Prophecy, Exodus 22:18; Leviticus 20:27;
Deuteronomy 13:1-5; 18:20; 1 Samuel 28:3,9.

Adultery, Leviticus 20:10-12; Deuteronomy 22:22.

Unchastity. This is the area of sexual intercourse apart from the
involvement of a married person.

Pre-marital sex, Deuteronomy 22:13-21. If a woman is proved to not be a
virgin on her wedding night, then her husband may prove the charge, and
have her put to death. Pre-marital sex is still intercourse with someone
else’s partner in life, even though that has not been revealed by God.

Sex with a betrothed, or engaged person, Deuteronomy 22:23-24.

3. Pre-marital sex with a priest’s daughter, Leviticus 21:9.

Rape, Deuteronomy 22:25.

Incest, homosexuality, and bestiality, Exodus 22:19; Leviticus 20:11-17.

Abducting people for slavery, Exodus 21:16; Deuteronomy 24:7.

Idolatry, Leviticus 20:1-5; Deuteronomy 13:2-19; 17:2-7.

False witnessing in capital cases, Deuteronomy 19:16,19.

Murder, Exodus 21:12; Leviticus 24:17; Numbers 35:16-21.

The penalty of being ‘cut off from the people’.

This is a simple synonym for capital punishment.

The crimes listed under this synonym are as follows:

Defiance of authority, Numbers 15:30-31.

Incest, Leviticus 18:6-23,29.

Uncircumcision, Genesis 17:14.

Neglect of the Passover, Numbers 19:13; eating leavened bread on the
Passover, Exodus 12:15,19.

Sabbath breaking, Exodus 31:14.

Improper observance of the Day of Atonement, Leviticus 23:26-30.

The practice of child sacrifice, Leviticus 20:3.

Witchcraft, Leviticus 20:6.

Violating the sacrifices by eating the fat, Leviticus 7:25, or eating
the blood, Leviticus 7:27; 17:14, eating when the eater is unclean,
Leviticus 7:20, 22:3-6, eating a sacrifice late, Leviticus 19:5-8.

10. General neglect of purification, Numbers 19:13,20 and other improper
procedures, Leviticus 17:3f; 17:8f.

Methods of capital punishment.

Stoning was the most common mode of execution. By including many people
in the execution, there was a strong impression of corporate culpability
in the crime. God designed this to be a tool for the creation of
positive peer pressure.

In some cases, the bodies of the victims were incinerated, so as to
obliterate their memory from the people, Leviticus 20:4; Leviticus 21:9.

In later times, execution was done by means of beheading, 2 Samuel 16:9;
2 Kings 6:31f.

Other penalties, not requiring death.

Flogging, for the loser in a civil dispute, Deuteronomy 25:1-3.

Monetary restitution for any breaking of a Holy thing, Leviticus
5:15-16. But no other fines are a part of the Mosaic Law.

Imprisonment was never a part of the Law, except for detention before
and during a trial. Although it is mentioned often in the Bible, it is
never commanded!

Imprisonment does not reform criminals; it makes them better at what
they do.

Imprisonment does not make restitution; it gives security to those who
are imprisoned.

Imprisonment is a paradox. It is not required in a society that is
virtuous enough to execute true menaces to society. It only seems a
necessity when virtue is breached.

Imprisonment is one of the greatest wastes of money in our country.

Mutilation was authorized for one crime only, Deuteronomy 25:11, “If two
men, a man and his countryman, are struggling together, and the wife of
one comes near to deliver her husband from the hand of the one who is
tricking him, and puts out her hand and seizes his genitals, then you
shall cut off her hand; you shall not show pity.”

Restitution for theft, Exodus 22:1-4,9.

The Mosaic Law reaches a pinnacle of common sense genius here.

When a theft occurs, there is a system whereby the convicted thief must
pay his victim more than what was originally stolen.

The system:

If the thief has not sold or slaughtered or destroyed what was stolen,
he is to pay double.

If the thief has sold or slaughtered or destroyed what was stolen, then:

For an ox, he must pay five oxen.

For a sheep, he must pay four sheep.

If anyone is caught with stolen property, he will pay double.

Furthermore, killing a thief while he is in the process of his crimes is
completely authorized.

Restitution for carelessness, Exodus 22:5-6.

Payment in kind is required when carelessness causes someone’s property
to be destroyed.

Payment in kind is a fair method for liability.

The Law Regarding Self-Defense. Exodus 21:23-25; Leviticus 24:19-22;
Deuteronomy 19:21; Matthew 5:38-42.

It is natural that law enforcement officials cannot be on the scene of
every crime.

The Mosaic Law fairly delegates authority to citizens regarding
self-defense, so that criminals might be caught and stopped in the act
of their crimes.

The three citations of the lex talionis have to do with personal
restitution. It is clear from each that this is so.

The lex talionis is set up this way so as to provide satisfaction in the
case of personal injury.

The satisfaction keeps the Hatfields and McCoys from occurring. If there
is justice and satisfaction, then there is no need for an ongoing feud.

But Christ puts a new twist on the Lex Talionis when He interprets it.

“38 You heard that it was said, An eye for an eye, and, a tooth for a
tooth. 39 But I myself say to you do not stand against evil; but whoever
slaps you on your right cheek, turn to him also the left; 40 And while
someone wishes to sue you and to take your shirt, give to him also your
coat; 41 and whoever presses you into service for one mile, go with him
two; 42 give to the one who asks you, and do not turn away the one who
wishes to borrow from you.”

This interpretation concentrates not on restitution, but self-defense.

First comes the quotation of the Lex Talionis, usually taken on the
corporate side of defense against crime.

The corporate side is the side where proper jurisprudence must take
place; where the rules for evidence must be obeyed; and where properly
convicted criminals are given their just due.

But the personal side of the Lex Talionis has to do with the exigencies
of the situation.

The general rule is that you are allowed to defend yourself with force
equal to the threat against you.

This general rule applies only if the threat cannot be stopped in a
timely manner by corporate measures, i.e., the police officer, or others
from the general populace.

Both of these systems of protection against crime are sides to the same
coin. The citizen is authorized to act for the state when the state
cannot act in time.

The state is considered to be preferred for the prevention of crime.

Although the Roman Law was good, and although there was much restraint
on crime in Israel during the time of Christ, there were still times
when the criminal element took advantage of innocent victims.

Because of this, it would be natural for Christ’s audience to balk at
what He was suggesting: that they refrain even from self-defense.

However, since the system of justice will be so swift and sure during
His millennial reign, there will be no need for the self-defense
provisions of the Mosaic Law.

Now the first crime mentioned is violence. If someone strikes you, you
are not to reply in kind. In fact, Christ will handle things.

The second has to do with a frivolous lawsuit. If someone tries to
redistribute your wealth, you would normally fight them tooth and nail
in the courtroom.

But, in the millennium, there is no need for that. Christ is the perfect
judge, and in His kingdom He judges with perfect fairness and immediacy.
You money and property is safe in the millennium.

Being pressed into service was a problem with Rome. aggareu/sei is
literally press into service.

It is well-documented that the Romans took advantage of their occupation
of Jewish land.

They had much power because of their military domination of the region,
and the Roman soldier was not above abusing that power.

Therefore, it was common for Jewish citizens to be pressed into service,
both when the Roman military had a legitimate need, and when it did not.

In the millennium, being pressed into service will always come about
because of legitimate need, and therefore Christ calls for enthusiastic
volunteer service.

Finally, there is the idea of legitimate need. In the millennium, when
your neighbor needs something, he legitimately needs it.

There will be no lending business during the millennium. What is
legitimately needed will be freely given.

And, the lender need have no worry about the payback, because Christ is
on the throne.

Today, we have a system whereby interest is charged on loans, so that
the borrower will be encouraged to pay back the money. No need for that
when Christ rules.

Let me be clear: there is no compulsion for you to lend money to anyone
during the church age. It is a choice that you make based on your
wisdom.

Our twisted system: a review.

We fail in the area of jurisprudence.

Trials are much too long.

There is way to much poor evidence allowed in the courtroom.

Too many criminals are released on technicalities.

We fail in the area of judicial punishment.

The prison system is an utter failure. The Bible points out that the
only need for prison is to hold suspected criminals for a very short
time, until they are tried.

The failure to apply capital punishment where it is deserved is an utter
disgrace.

Church Age Distinctions.

The nation is independent from the church during this dispensation.

As such, what the nation chooses for its establishment doctrines is not
a function of the church. The system of judicial punishment, military
draft and training, taxation, and anything else that comes under the
umbrella of divine establishment is left to the nation to decide.

In no way is the church to function as the nation, or usurp national
function, during this dispensation.

The church has a limited function in the area of banishment for the
protection of its flock.

Both pastors and laymen alike may be banished if it is in the best
interest of the local assembly to do so.

In any area where a member or associate of the church has committed a
crime that comes under the function of the state, the church is to
cooperate in any way possible.

The Mosaic Law defines the best way for any state in any time to be run.
Any nation may confidently incorporate any part of the establishment
code expecting the best possible results.

Believers in Jesus Christ who are given a say in how their government
will be formed or run should always support the side of the
establishment code.

Believers in Jesus Christ are always morally responsible in spite of the
looseness of their national laws.

Love Your Enemies
-----------------

Matthew 5:43-48: “43 You heard that it was said, ‘Love your neighbor’
and, ‘Hate your enemy’. 44 But I say to you, love your enemies and pray
for those who persecute you, 45 so that you might become sons of your
Father who is in heaven, because He rises His sun on the evil and the
good and rains on the righteous and unrighteous. 46 For if you love the
ones who love you, what reward do you have? Do not also the taxgatherers
do the same? 47 And if you greet your brothers only, what greater thing
do you do? Do not also the Gentiles do the same? 48 Therefore, you be
mature as your Heavenly Father is mature.”

Luke 6:27-30, 32-36: “27 But I say to you who hear, ‘Love your enemies,
do well to those who hate you, 28 bless those who curse you, pray for
those who mistreat you. 29 to those who strike you on the cheek, offer
also the other, and from the one who takes away your shirt, do not
withhold also your tunic. 30 To everyone who asks of you give, and from
the one who takes what is yours do not ask for it back. 32 And if you
love the one who loves you, what kind of grace is to you? For the
sinners also love those who love them. 33 And if you do good to those
who do good to you, what kind of grace is to you? The sinners also do
the same thing. 34 And if you lend to the ones from whom you hope to
receive, what kind of grace? Sinners also lend to sinners to receive
their share. 35 Yet love your enemies and do good and lend expecting
nothing in return and your reward will be much, and you will be sons of
the Most High; for He Himself is gracious to the kind and ungrateful. 36
Become merciful just as also your Father is merciful.”

Introduction.

The Luke passage paraphrases and intermingles some of the things that
have already been mentioned by Matthew.

This is important: we now come to some personal applications of the
Establishment Code for the Kingdom. Luke connects them back to some
other things we have covered.

The principle to love your enemies is intertwined with the previous
comments about self-defense.

Not only are you to leave your defense with the Lord, but you are also
to offer aid and comfort to your enemy.

This is a part of the Establishment Code for the Kingdom, and is not
meant for the church age; let me tell you why:

The command to love everyone with virtue love is a dispensational
constant. To desire the best for all men is obviously true whenever and
wherever you live.

The command to love your neighbor comes from Leviticus 19:17-18, “You
shall not hate your fellow countryman in your heart; you may surely
reprove your neighbor, but shall not incur sin because of him. You shall
not take vengeance, nor bear any grudge against the sons of your people,
but you shall love your neighbor as yourself; I am the Lord.”

A neighbor would be anyone who is in one of your peripheries: at church,
at home, at work, among friends.

The concept of neighbor does not extend far beyond the immediate
periphery.

In reality, the English word ‘neighbor’ does not communicate the idea
very well. The Hebrew word is RE’A, which is actually better translated
as friend.

The command verb in the Hebrew is from AHAB, which denotes personal
love. The virtue connotation is weaker than in HESED, but there may be
something still there.

So you are to personally love your friends as you do yourself.

There is no doubt that this command from Leviticus has limits.

There is no specific command to hate your enemy. However, the Old
Testament is full of passages that allow believers to “hate” their
enemies.

David’s imprecatory prayers in the Psalms clearly show that he desires
for God to wipe out his enemies!

Psalm 54: “Save me, O God, by Thy name, and vindicate me by Thy power.
Hear my prayer, O God; Give ear to the words of my mouth. For strangers
have risen against me, and violent men have sought my life; they have no
set God before them. Behold, God is my helper; the Lord is the sustainer
of my soul. He will recompense the evil to my foes; destroy them in Thy
faithfulness. Willingly I will sacrifice to Thee; I will give thanks to
Thy name, O Lord, for it is good. For he has delivered me from all
trouble; and my eye has looked with satisfaction upon my enemies.”

In this Psalm, David wishes the worst upon his enemies.

Christ is not quoting when says ‘hate your enemies’, He is simply citing
something that was a well-know Old Testament doctrine.

The Hebrew word is SANE’, which means to hate. According to the
Theological Wordbook of the Old Testament, vol. II, p.880, SANE’
“…expresses an emotional attitude toward persons and things which are
opposed, detested, despised and with which one wishes to have no contact
or relationship. It is therefore the opposite of love. Whereas love
draws and unites, hate separates and keeps distant. The hated and hating
persons are considered foes or enemies and are considered odious,
utterly unappealing.”

The Greek translation is misoj, which has exactly the same connotation.

In fact, there is an Old Testament verse which is a command to provide
logistics to your enemy, Proverbs 25:21-22, “If your enemy is hungry,
give him food to eat; and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink; for
you will heap burning coals on his head, and the Lord will reward you.”

However, at the same time, on the battlefield you are authorized to take
the life of your enemy. In that situation, you must go all the way in
order to prevent your own demise.

The fact is, when you encounter your enemy on the battlefield, you wish
the worse for him; you wish him to death.

When your enemy is in the field against you, you wish the worst for him
- that he dies of disease before you ever face him; that his army
retreats; that his nation surrenders.

In summary, ‘hate your enemies’ is the opposite of love, and is
sometimes a necessity in the devil’s world.

The content of this passage is for the millennium; anyone who declares
himself an enemy of another during that time will be handled by the
Lord. There is no reason for hatred when perfect and timely justice
exists.

Hatred is an expression of self-defense. Not that you should ever hate
anyone, or seek to make anyone your enemy. But what if someone decides
to be your enemy in spite of your application of Romans 12:18, “If
possible, so far as it depends on you, be at peace with all men.”?

An enemy is someone who hates you; even someone who wants to destroy
you. Listen again to Paul in Romans 12:14, “Bless those who persecute
you; bless and curse not.” and verse seventeen, “Never pay back evil for
evil to anyone. Respect what is right in the sight of all men.” And
again in verse nineteen, “Never take your own revenge, beloved, but
leave room for the wrath of God, for it is written, ‘Vengeance is Mine,
I will repay’, says the Lord.”

In fact let’s take a longer look at this passage, since it is the only
one in the New Testament with a command about our enemies: “9 Love is
unhypocritical. While abhoring what is evil, clinging to the good, 10 in
brotherly love, being devoted to one another, in honor, leading the way
for one another, 11 in diligence, not lagging behind, being fervent in
spirit, serving in the lord, 12 rejoicing in hope, persevering in
tribulation, busily engaging in prayer; 13 contributing to the needs of
the saints, pursuing hospitality [while doing all these things] 14 bless
those who persecute you, bless and do not curse. 15 Rejoice with the
rejoicing; cry with the crying. 16 While thinking the same about one
another, not thinking haughtily but associating with the humble, do not
become wise from yourselves. 17 While not repaying evil for evil,
thinking what is good before all men, 18 if able from yourself, having
peace with all men, 19 never taking your own revenge, beloved, but give
a place for [divine] wrath, for it has been written, Vengeance is Mine,
I will repay, says the Lord. 20 But If your enemy is hungry feed him; if
thirsty, water him; for doing this you will heap burning coals of fire
upon his head. 21 I do not conquer by means of evil, but you conquer
evil by means of the good.

The title of this discourse is ‘Love is unhypocritical’. H) a)ga/ph
anupo/kritoj.) It contains eight commands, and all are related to the
theme of spiritual maturity.

The outline is as follows:

While doing the things of the Christian life, bless those who persecute
you.

The Two Commands Related to Appropriate Emotion.

While having good relationships, grow spiritually.

While not taking your own revenge, give a place for divine wrath.

The Two Commands Related to Logistics for Your Enemy.

Conquer evil by means of the good.

This entire passage is about balancing your Christian life.

There is an internal aspect to your Christian life in the intake of
doctrine.

There is an external aspect in the application of doctrine.

There is an internal aspect in your activities within the local and
universal church; your friends and Christian fellowship.

There is an external aspect in your interaction with people who reside
in the cosmic system.

Five of the commands have to do with the Christian’s relationship with
those who reside in the cosmic system.

Bless and do not curse those who persecute you. In other words, ask the
Lord’s blessings upon them; keep on desiring the best for them even
though they are your enemy.

Give a place for divine wrath. Let the Lord do the discipline and never
take matters into your own hands. This does not eradicate your Biblical
right to self-defense.

Feed and water your enemies; in other words, if it is up to you, do not
let your enemy die. Keeping your enemy alive means giving him a chance
for repentance.

Conquer evil by means of the good. The good is Bible doctrine, and it is
the means to conquering evil in your life.

Although revenge belongs to the Lord, self-defense belongs to you, and
self-defense is the immediate context of this Sermon on the Mount
passage.

In conclusion, if it is on the battlefield, you may be sure that you can
do your duty with a clear conscience. If you or someone else is the
victim of crime, and you can intervene so that the criminal is stopped
with the appropriate amount of force, even lethal force, then you can do
so with confidence that it is your civic duty.

Christ is clearly asking His listeners to leave self-defense behind
anywhere.

The list of applications.

Love your enemies.

Do well to those who hate you.

So, if you have someone who hates you, do well to them. The Greek is
quite simple: kalwj poieite. kalwj simply indicates something of passing
value; something that belongs only to this world. In essence it is the
fulfillment of the Old Testament command from Proverbs 25:21-22.

Doing well to your enemies means helping them when their life
circumstances (usually through divine discipline) become difficult.

Bless those who curse you (see above).

Pray for those who persecute you.

This is an extension of the command to bless those who hate you.

This is one of the great gimmicks of the Bible. You cannot
simultaneously pray for and hate your enemy. You must be in fellowship
to pray for him, and if you hate him you are not in fellowship. So if
you are to fulfill this command, then you must do so from a position of
impersonal love.

The principle of divine provision. “so that you might become sons of
your Father who is in heaven, because He rises His sun on the evil and
the good and rains on the righteous and unrighteous.”

We are called to love our enemies so that we might become sons of our
Father who is in heaven.

The sonship occurs because of imitation. Christ is calling us to imitate
the character of God.

Imitation of God’s character is a pretty good definition of spiritual
maturity. In fact, it is the highest expression of love that any
believer can make. Imitation of Divine character is the fulfillment of
the greatest commandment.

The specific way in which we are to imitate divine character is in the
category of impersonal love toward our enemies.

God rises His sun on the evil and the good and rains on the righteous
and unrighteous. Sun and rain are both necessary for the growth of
crops; they cause the crop to grow which allows all people to live.

The application of Proverbs 25:21-22 comes directly into view here.
Providing logistics to your enemy in his time of legitimate need is a
godly act.

This shows that you want your enemy to live; that you want him to have
the chance to repent before God and follow you to maturity.

God is not willing for any to perish. He is not willing for any to be
cast into the Lake of Fire. He is not willing for any believer to fall
short of maturity.

But He honors free will! And when people are negative to His plan, it is
a good thing to prolong their lives, unless those people are such a
menace that His justice must act.

This applies within the laws of divine establishment. If the Mosaic Law
demands the justice of capital punishment, then capital punishment it
must be.

However, if someone is your enemy, and they have not committed a capital
crime, then it is right to provide for their legitimate needs.

The issue of eternal reward, “And if you love the one who loves you,
what kind of grace reward is to you? For the sinners and taxgatherers
also love those who love them. And if you do good to those who do good
to you, what kind of grace reward is to you? The sinners also do the
same thing. And if you lend to the ones from whom you hope to receive,
what kind of grace reward? Sinners also lend to sinners to receive their
share. And if you greet your brothers only, what greater thing do you
do? Do not also the Gentiles do the same?”

Christ now turns to the issue of heavenly reward - the portfolio of
reward for the mature believer.

He says that if you only love those who love you, and do good to those
who do good to you, and lend to the ones from whom you hope to receive,
and greet your brothers only, then you have no grace reward.

The grace reward comes from a combination of Matthew and Luke. Matthew
says misqon, which is the Greek word for reward, or even profit or
wages, while Luke says xarij, which is a grace gift.

The combination of these two is good. It tells us that the reward comes
from the grace of God, and that without the grace of God, the reward
would not be ours.

Think about it. It is His salvation, we only choose it; it is His word
and Spirit, we only choose to learn and apply it.

Without His initiative and provision, our efforts at spiritual growth
would be for naught.

Even with the concept of reward - that we earned the reward - we must
humbly acknowledge that we earned through appropriating divine power,
and divine truth.

It is God’s system of merit; it is His system of thinking; it is His
system of power.

What kind of reward do we have if we only love those who love us? Well
we can fill the blank with the answer ‘none’. Christ employs the word
poia to signify this. It means literally, ‘what kind’ as a sort of
question.

Imitating sinners and taxgatherers and unbelievers is certainly not an
imitation of God. When we extend our virtue love only to those who love
us, we imitate all the occupants of the cosmic system.

Invisible Impact of Christians
------------------------------

Matthew 6:1-4: “1 Be careful to not practice your righteousness before
men for them to observe. For if not, you do not have a reward from your
Father who is in heaven. 2 Therefore whenever you practice mercy, do not
sound a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and
in the streets, so they might be glorified by men. Truly I say to you,
they possess their reward. 3 Now you, while practicing mercy do not let
your left hand know what your right is doing, 4 so also let your mercy
be in secret; and your Father who sees in secret will repay you.”

Outline.

Introduction: the command of prohibition.

The bottom line: reward in heaven.

The reward is what they seek - they seek lowly things.

The attitude and practice of the Secret Service.

The reward for Secret Service.

An implication of public service: God cannot see in secret.

Exposition.

Translation, v.1: “Be careful to not practice your righteousness before
men for them to observe. For if not, you do not have a reward from your
Father who is in heaven.”

The verse begins with the present imperative verb prosexete. It means to
‘take hold of something’, ‘to grasp a concept’, or ‘to exercise care’.
The present tense tells us that Christ intends for the action to begin
immediately if it is not taking right now, and to continue on into the
future.

The verb poiein translates as ‘practice’. This is the present
infinitive, and it is the complement of prosexete. It completes the
thought. So the practice of righteousness is in view here.

Christ has just completed a discourse on the practice of mercy toward
one’s enemies. This could be one practice of righteousness; there are
many others! And it is worthwhile to note that righteousness is a
practice.

The motivation for the practice of righteousness is never approbation
from men. Their opinions do not count in the long run.

You never do something out of the motivation of wanting others to see
it. That is not the attitude of the mature believer.

If you practice righteousness for the purpose of gaining approbation
before men, then you do not have a reward.

Translation, v.2: “Therefore, whenever you perform an act of mercy, do
not sound a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues
and in the streets, so that they might be glorified by men; Truly I say
to you, they have received their reward.”

This verse does not say ‘give alms.’ The church moneymongers must have
translated this one. The phrase is POIES ELEEMOSUNEN.

1. The verb POIES is the present subjunctive, and it shows a potential
action. “Perform,” “enact,” “practice,” or “do” is proper for this verb.
Since it focuses on a single act, practice is out. Because of the verb
with which it is coupled, perform is right.

ELEEMOSUNEN is the abstract form of ‘mercy.’ ‘Merciness’ would be right,
if there were such a word in the English. A similar phenomenon is
DIKAIOSUNE. DIKAIOS is ‘righteous,’ while DIKAIOSUNE is ‘righteousness.’
It is little more abstract.

So this word is not a specific word at all, but one that is quite
abstract and purposefully vague, because an act of mercy can find
application in a very broad spectrum. To make this one specific act of
mercy is wrong. A translator would only do so if he had an agenda.

You are forbidden to sound the trumpet before you as you do acts of
mercy.

This is a method of advertising in the ancient world. You sound the
trumpet before you as you go around town selling your wares.

This is a really poor marketing technique, as it brings attention to the
one doing the act, and not attention to God.

The primary realm of impact is angelic. When you perform an act of
mercy, it is for the object of your mercy, and for the angels to see.
The observation of men who are not rightfully involved is not important
at all.

The hypocrites advertise because they want to be glorified by men.

This naturally implies that God is not important to them. This is a
really poor set of priorities.

A hypocrite is an actor, someone who puts on a face for the crowd, but
who is in reality a totally different person.

Television interviews of actors and actresses are especially interesting
because you get to meet the real person, and not the person in the role.

A hypocrite wants to be perceived as a holy person, and is compelled to
display his righteousness in public, so that the public knows.

Anyone can do the outward form of the righteous act. The outward form of
the righteous act does not always reveal the heart of hearts.

In fact, the desire for approbation within a righteous act almost always
reveals a hypocrite.

The hypocrite has received his reward, and glory from man is the balance
in full.

APECHO means to receive the balance in full from a debt.

So the hypocrite who gets glory from men receives the balance in full of
his reward.

Heavenly reward is so much better than what paltry things that we get on
this earth. The things of this earth will all pass away, but God has a
system of eternal reward that will be ours forever.

The hypocrite may be a believer; and as such he has his eternal
salvation. But the rewards above and beyond that are exceptional beyond
imagination, and worth the tradeoff for lack of recognition now.

Translation, vv.3-4: “But while you are doing an act of mercy, do not
let your left hand know what your right is doing, so that your act of
mercy might be in secret; and your Father who sees in secret might
reward you.”

Christ employs a genitive absolute at the beginning of this context in
order to make some form of contrast. The genitive absolute is a
grammatical construction that has no connection with the rest of the
sentence. It is employed to show dissonance or disconnection of thought.
Sometimes it is a foreshadowing of evil; at other times it makes an
ironic statement; and still others it shows that something’s is unusual
or infrequent.

Here the genitive absolute shows the disconnection between doing good
and the desire for approbation.

The left hand is the sin nature; the right hand is the soul in
fellowship with God. You are to do your works without allowing any
involvement on the part of your sin nature.

Therefore, you must do your good works with no profit at all to your sin
nature; there can be absolutely no payoff there.

God the Father is the only one who must see your acts of mercy. He is
the only one who counts, because He is the one who gives the true and
lasting reward.

Matthew 6:5-8: “5 And whenever you pray, do not be like the hypocrites,
because they love to pray after they have stood in the synagogues and on
the corners of the wide streets, so that they might show off to men.
Truly I say to you, they have received their reward. 6 But you, whenever
you pray, go into your private room and after shutting the door pray to
your Father who is in secret; and your Father Who sees in secret will
reward you. 7 And while praying do not babble like the Gentiles, for
they assume that in their many words they have an answer. 8 Therefore do
not be like them; for your Father knows what needs you have before you
ask Him.”

Christ paints this image of the hypocrites. They go with much pomp and
circumstance to the synagogue or the corner of the wide streets, and
they stand like no one has ever done before. They stand up with a
flourish, as though the act is a pronouncement in itself.

And after they have stood, they pray, assuming everyone should listen.
They love the public nature of their prayers, and every prayer is a
sample of excellent praying, full of holy language.

They have their reward in full: public adoration. They will have to
dwell on that approbation for all eternity, and feed from it, for it
will be the sum total of their reward there.

But Christ says that prayer is between you and God, and that you should
go to a private room, your refuge, and there offer your prayers in
secret.

God is in secret; pray to Him in secret, and He will reward you. And
that reward is one which will last forever.

Christ’s second exhortation about prayer has to do with meaningless
repetition. He warns against babbling like the Gentiles do. The word is
BATTALOGESETE, and it means to speak repetitively without purpose. It
means to babble on endlessly about meaningless things.

It describes an attempt to pester God until He gives in out of
exasperation. The image is of a five year old endlessly pestering his
parents. But of course God has integrity.

The Gentiles assume (DOKEO) that with many words they have an answer.
This is a wrong assumption.

The final principle should be obvious, but many Christians miss it: God
knows what you need before you ask. You do not need to keep reminding
Him of it.

The Lord’s Prayer
-----------------

“9 Therefore you pray like this: “Our Father who is in heaven; let your
name be sanctified; 10 Let Your kingdom come; let Your will be done, as
in heaven so upon earth; 11 Give to us today our logistical bread, 12
and forgive us our debts as we ourselves also forgave our debtors; 13
and do not bring us into testing, but save us from the evil.’”

Introduction:

1. Dispensational constants are those elements of the portfolio of grace
assets which are available in every dispensation.

2. Dispensational variables are those elements of the portfolio of grace
assets which are not available in all of the dispensations. They may
exist in one or more, but not all of them.

3.This prayer is for the disciples of Jesus Christ at that time.
Remember, He is revealing His millennial kingdom to them, and so this
prayer is going to feature certain dispensational variables related to
their situation. These will not apply to us directly.

There are similarities of conditions that make some elements of this
prayer agenda relevant to our own dispensation, and we will note them
when appropriate.

Christ makes this prayer an emphatic command. He adds the personal
pronoun HUMEIS to the present imperative PROSEUCHESTHE, and it comes
out, “You pray…’

1. The inclusion of the personal pronoun is a contrast on the preceding
bad examples of prayer.

The logical conjunction OUN also points to what has gone before. Christ
is saying, “on the basis of what has gone before, you do something
different.’

The present tense of the imperative indicates that this prayer is to be
a regular part of the disciples’ lives. The iterative present aspect
emphasizes the regularity of the prayer.

The adverb HOUTOS concentrates on similitude without the necessity for
exactitude. In other words we are to pray like this, but not exactly
like this.

Hence, the rote recitation of the Lord’s prayer is directly against the
intent of Christ.

In this prayer He gives His disciples an agenda for prayer, a general
outline of how they should pray when they do pray.

Any prayer which is repeated from rote is going to lose its meaning over
time. The vitality of your prayer life depends on whether you make this
work.

The first part of the agenda is the address.

1. The person addressed is God the Father, and this is certainly a
dispensational constant. You should always pray to the first person of
the godhead.

Christ locates the Father in heaven. This is an intriguing addition, for
it describes Him as entirely apart from us with regard to space. It also
functions to distinguish Him from our earthly fathers.

So here is the perfect example of the principle of protocol. You must
put the correct address on your prayers.

The second part of the agenda is about spiritual growth.

1. Jesus says, “let Your name be sanctified.’

The verb is HAGIASTHETO. It is in the aorist tense, and it is an
imperative verb. So this is a command, and since it is in the third
person singular, it is the imperative of entreaty, which designates a
polite command.

The verb itself is HAGIAZO in the lexical form. It means to “sanctify,’
or “make holy.’

It may denote what God the Holy Spirit does in His baptizing ministry at
salvation: positional sanctification.

It may denote the process of experiential sanctification, which comes
through the intake and application of Bible truth.

The verb is passive, so that the subject receives the action of
sanctification. The subject is TO ONOMA SOU, “Your name.’ God’s name
always represents His very essence.

So the translation is “let your name be sanctified.’

This is a prayer for people to make God’s name holy in their hearts.
There is only one way that this can come about, and that is through
spiritual growth.

Spiritual growth occurs through faith perception of the truth. God’s
name is made holy in our hearts only because of the truth resident
there.

Therefore a conclusion:

This part of the agenda may include all aspects of the grace portfolio
related to spiritual growth.

You may pray this prayer for yourself, or you may pray it for another.
It is equally effective, and guaranteed to work.

We can never order God to sanctify His name apart from the volitional
decisions of those involved; we may pray for everything else.

This is the greatest and most important prayer that you can pray for
yourself or anyone else. Spiritual growth is your number one priority.

The third part of the model prayer is related to the kingdom of God.

1. Again there is an aorist imperative of entreaty, this time from the
verb ELTHETO.

2. So there is a polite command regarding the kingdom of God and its
arrival.

This refers to the second advent of Christ - the millennial kingdom.

You should know that the arrival of the kingdom of God is not contingent
on our prayers. God alone knows the day and the hour, and that time is
set. We cannot change the unchangeable decree.

Yet, the time is hidden from us, as it was from them. Christ charged His
disciples with the content of this prayer, even though they would not
see His kingdom in their lifetimes.

But Christ did not and does not know the day nor the hour. It is not a
cruelty to include this prayer.

Some prayers orient the believer to the will of God, and place them in
the right frame of mind to wait for Him. We have seen this, and this is
also the case here.

The phrase “let Your kingdom come’ is like saying “when You see fit.’

Now we play the waiting game during our lives in the same way. We do not
know the time of the rapture, for the day and the hour are hidden from
us.

10. But we too can orient to the sovereign wisdom of God; we too can
humbly place ourselves at the mercy of His perfect timing. This one
applies just as well to us as to the disciples.

Next is a contingency: “Let Your will become as in heaven so upon
earth.”

1. The aorist imperative of GENETHETO comes out as “let your will
become…’

This is the verb GINOMAI, which depicts the entry of something
previously unintroduced. It is usually something totally new and even
unique.

The will of God is the expression of His sovereign and perfect volition.

But God has chosen for the freedom of creature volition, and therefore
His will is not always done.

Created beings often do not choose for the right, which makes this
prayer valid.

But that is not all. This portion of the prayer is contingent on what
has gone before. If God’s kingdom does not come, then let God’s will
become.

Added to this is the phrase, “as in heaven so upon earth.’ This calls
for a mirroring. In heaven God rules supreme. The creatures who live
there, angels and saved men, are completely submissive to His will.

Now this also is a legitimate prayer for us in this dispensation. We
desire for God’s will to be done in the lives of His creatures.

7.This is the companion with the first part of the agenda: “Let Your
name be sanctified.”

Those who sanctify God’s name do His will. This too may become a prayer
about the availability of grace assets, but is mostly a reminder of
responsibility.

The ensuing part of the agenda has to do with logistics.

1. The aorist active imperative verb DOS is this time a direct command.
There is no polite entreaty here.

The adjective EPIOUSION gives further description to ARTON, bread. It
defines the exact type of bread.

The adjective is a compound of the preposition EPI and OUSIA, which
denotes physical property or existence.

The result of this compound is “for existence.’ And so this is a matter
of physical existence.

You have a right to demand of God the basic necessities for existence.
Because you are a creature, He is responsible for those things.

You must of course be willing to work for the access of these
necessities, but God is responsible for the work, so that you can access
those necessities.

This does not have to do with above and beyond logistics. Rather, just
the physical necessities. Since the fall of man, these things must be
worked for in some manner, but they are nonetheless available.

With the use of EPIOUSION, this concentrates on physical logistics
alone. The rest we have covered. Again, this applies to church age
believers equally.

Following the necessary logistics is the prayer for forgiveness: “and
forgive us our debts, as we also forgave our debtors.”

1. This is actually a tricky little portion of this model prayer. The
tenses are real important, as are some of the lexical issues.

There is a logical progression in this prayer that is not commonly a
part of your English translations.

The first part is easy enough: the aorist active imperative APHES is a
direct command of God.

The indirect object of the verb is “us.’ We are the benefactors of God’s
forgiveness.

The direct object is “our debts.’ Although it is literally “debts,’ it
is the debt of sin which is the subject of the prayer. Christ simply
uses “debt’ as a metaphor for sin. In Luke’s parallel passage, Luke 11,
it is certainly HAMARTIA, and so that clears up the issue once and for
all.

You may demand forgiveness from God, since your debts have been paid by
the death of Christ on the cross. You don’t have to beg and plead; it is
not necessary to do penance. The debt is completely paid in full, and
forgiveness is promised to those who confess their sins.

But there is even more here.

(1) The forgiveness of this verse is contingent on whether we forgive
others.

(2) It can be rightfully translated, “since we forgave others.’

(3) The most important part of this is the aorist tense of the verb
APHIEMI. Its form here is APHEKAMEN, and it is a kappa aorist MI verb.

(4) The aorist tense in the indicative mood portrays past action, so it
is definitely dependent on our past forgiveness of others.

(5) Now this is the picture. We may demand forgiveness from God if we
have forgiven others.

(6) But if we have not forgiven others, then we remain out of fellowship
from Him, and so there is no effective forgiveness.

(7) Holding a grudge perpetuates sin indefinitely. You may confess that
sin, but if you continue to hold the grudge you are right back out of
fellowship again.

The Final Element, “and do not bring us into testing, but save us from
the evil.’”

1. The aorist subjunctive of EISPHERO plus the negative adverb ME form a
strong prohibition directed toward God.

Although there are several degrees of prohibition, and this is only one
short of the strongest. This is strong language indeed to direct at God.

EISPHERO itself has an interesting lexical history:

From Liddell & Scott:

To bring in or contribute, as a description of cooperative effort.

To pay the property tax, again in the collective sense.

To introduce, especially of political measures.

To make a proposition, or to nominate someone.

From Kittel:

Convey a message (bring it into the building).

Bring a sacrifice into the temple for offering.

“Bring” something somewhere, in a very generic sense.

4. PEIRASMON is the direct object of EISPHERO.

In the secular record, it means:

To try or test someone out of distrust.

To test the lines of the enemy with a probe.

In the Biblical record, it means:

Genesis 22:1-19, God tests Abraham (LXX).

This is where God commands Abraham to sacrifice his son Isaac.

Abraham proves himself faithful, even unto the sacrifice of his son.

He has a vital identification with the sacrifice of God, because God
would have to go through with the same ordeal.

Abraham’s love for God was therefore tremendous. Very few men have
equaled this identification.

It is abundantly clear from verses one and twelve that this test came
directly from God: “Now it came about after these things, that God
tested Abraham… …for now I know that you fear God, since you have not
withheld your son, your only son, from Me.”

Psalm 139:23, David asks God to test his heart (LXX).

Verses 23 and 24 read this way: “Search me, O God, and know my heart;
try me and know my anxious thoughts; and see if there be any hurtful way
in me, and lead me in the everlasting way.”

This is a request to examine David’s soul. The parallelism in verse 23
is decisive. The first

So this requests of God a searching and an examination by testing. An
examination by adversity so that any flaws might be discovered, and then
eliminated.

1 Corinthians 10:13, temptation or trial as external to man: “No
temptation has taken you but human; and God is faithful, who will not
allow you to be tempted beyond what you are able, but with the
temptation will provide the way of escape also, so that you will be able
to endure it.”

There is no such thing as superhuman temptation. God does not allow
this.

With the temptation you do receive, there is always a way out…

If you believe in this, then you will certainly begin to perceive its
function. You have to learn, however, to look for it.

Here God is presented as one who allows temptation, and restricts
temptation, and provides a way out of temptation, but Who does not tempt
directly.

James 1:2-4, external temptation or trial: “Consider it all joy, my
brothers, whenever you encounter various trials, knowing that the
testing of your faith produces endurance. And let endurance have a
finished product, that you might be mature and complete, lacking in
nothing.”

This concentrates on the human perspective of testing, and makes no
reference to God at all.

The verb PERIPIPTO depicts someone falling into a difficult situation,
and this is certainly the case from human perception. Our trials seem to
have a random nature from this point of view.

So in this important verse on temptation there is only a concentration
on the proper mental attitude, without looking at the issue of divine
involvement in temptation.

James 1:13-14, internal temptation - the sin nature. Temptation
emphatically not from God: “Let no one say while being tempted “I am
being tempted from God.’ For God is not the author of evil, and He
Himself tempts no one. But each one is tempted while being dragged away
and enticed by his own lust”

Now this gives an entirely different picture of temptation. It portrays
the source of temptation as the lust that is endemic to each human
being.

This lust, translated from EPITHUMIA is apparently the sin nature.

The sin nature provides an impulse toward sin, enticing and dragging
away the individual by making sin seem attractive.

The rationale given is that God is not the author of evil.

A summary & conclusion on the first half of the final element.

God tests us to see if we fear Him.

It is legitimate to ask God to test you, so as to eliminate flaws.

There is a distinct difference between the trial and the temptation to
sin.

The trial or test in life is something that God may bring directly, as
in the testing of Abraham, or it may be something that He allows, as in
1 Corinthians 10 and in the book of Job chapters 1 and 2.

h)

These trials are an opportunity to demonstrate your love for Him.

Both the illustration from Job and that from the life of Abraham confirm
this with clarity.

The book of James doesn’t care whether God brings the test or He allows
it; what really matters is our mental attitude during the test.

The temptation to sin is entirely separate from the trial. The trial of
the believer is adversity within the setting of the angelic conflict;
the temptation to sin comes from the sin nature, and is an impulse
against God.

God could never place within us an impulse to sin; He allows it as a
part of the angelic conflict, but He is the author of good and righteous
acts.

Satan is the author of sin; he is responsible for the sin nature.

God tests people; their sin nature tempts them to sin.

When God tests you or allows you to be tested, He is looking for good
within you, and giving you the opportunity to show your love for Him.
During this time you may be tempted by the sin nature, but He always
provides a way out of the temptation.

So when Christ prays this forceful prayer, you should understand that He
is concentrating not on the test or the trial, but on the temptation to
sin.

This prayer is 100% compatible with the verses that we have studied. God
does not lead us into temptation; Satan and his minions do.

This prayer does not negate our desire to undergo testing as an
opportunity to display the truth in our souls back to God.

The second half of the verse is the flip side.

It begins with the strong adversative conjunction ALLA. This represents
a very strong way to contradict what has preceded. So, instead of
leading us into temptation…

The aorist middle imperative verb RUSAI communicates a direct command
toward God. The command is for deliverance.

This is not an eternal salvation word per se. Rather, it conveys a
deliverance from physical or moral danger.

The preposition APO plus the genitive here indicates separation, and is
translated “from.’

The definite article really is quite significant. It gives exact
identity to a noun. The word it modifies is PONEROU, and this is
normally an adjective. The problem here is that the genitive case form
is identical in both the neuter and the masculine, so it is impossible
to tell whether this is “the evil thing’ or “the evil one.’

However, there is a way around this. Satan is the head of the cosmic
system. If it says “the evil thing,’ then we could conclude that this
was the cosmic system and its destructive influences.

If on the other hand it says “the evil one,’ it hardly matters, because
it stands for Satan and all He represents.

Both “lead us not into temptation’ and “but deliver us from the evil’
say much the same thing. Temptation leads to the cosmic system.

There are two items to the conclusion:

1. The general force of the prayer.

This prayer contains imperatives of entreaty and imperatives of command.

This prayer shows remarkable force considering that God reigns sovereign
over us.

Christ encourages His disciples to pray with force and boldness, even to
the sovereign God.

We can pray like this because of two things:

Therefore, get in the habit of praying forcefully when you are confident
that the matter is within His will.

2. The agenda given by Christ.

The address is to the Father.

Spiritual growth issues for yourself and for others.

The operation of grace assets.

The function of undeserved suffering.

Praise and worship - the expression of your desire to see Him face to
face and many more such expressions of praise.

Evangelism.

This includes grace assets, like common grace.

This includes divine intervention through circumstances and discipline.

This includes human instrumentality for the gospel.

Forgiveness, which comes through confession.

Preservation from temptation, but not from testing.

“9 Therefore you pray like this: “Our Father who is in heaven; let your
name be sanctified; 10 Let Your kingdom come; let Your will become, as
in heaven so upon earth; 11 Give to us today our logistical bread, 12
and forgive us our debts as we ourselves also forgave our debtors; 13
and do not bring us into testing, but save us from the evil.’”

The non-ending. “For Thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory
forever, amen.”

This ending is not a part of the original autograph of the Bible.

It was popular in the early (3rd to 7th centuries, AD) Syriac and Coptic
translations from

If it gained reception that late, it was not for a legitimate reason. It
did not come from the lips of Christ, and He never intended it for us.

Christ’s explanation of forgiveness:

Translation: “14 For if you forgive men their transgressions, your
heavenly Father will also forgive you; 15 But if you do not forgive men,
neither will your Father forgive your transgressions.”

1. The Greek third class conditional sentence contains an if… then
clause that represents an uncertain fulfillment. Generally the
fulfillment of the “if’ depends on the function of human volition.

Each of these verses is a third class conditional sentence. The first is
positive, while the second negative.

So if you forgive (and it is your choice to do so) then you will receive
forgiveness from God; if you do not forgive (and it is your choice to do
so) then you will not receive forgiveness from God.

The word for “transgressions’ is PARAPTOMA, and it generally describes
sins against God. Even when someone sins against you, ultimately it is
an offense against God. This should help you in the realm of
forgiveness.

And when you sin against someone else, it is still up to God to forgive
you. He is the one who restores fellowship through the power of the
Spirit.

Probably the major hurdle that most have about this passage is the
relationship between this forgiveness and salvation forgiveness. There
is none. This concentrates on the temporal forgiveness, not eternal
forgiveness.

Temporal forgiveness is God’s forgiveness of Christians in time. Eternal
forgiveness is that permanent forgiveness related to salvation.

1 John 1:9, Hebrews 10:22, and many other New Testament passages treat
this subject more thoroughly.

Essentially (see doctrine of fellowship), when we sin, even as
Christians we go out of fellowship with God; when we confess that sin,
God restores that fellowship.

10. However, when we hold a grudge, we perpetuate the sin, so that
confession does no good; we go right back out of fellowship again.

11. The perpetuation of other sins apply equally. In other words, you
continue to be out of fellowship when you perpetuate a state of sin.

12. So that, if you perpetuate a state of immorality, you will not
receive an effective forgiveness.

13. Failing to forgive someone is a state of sin against God; it is
holding a grudge. It perpetuates sin, and you cannot re-establish
fellowship until that state of sin is eliminated.

14. It is God’s character to forgive; sin is falling short of God’s holy
character; if we fail to forgive, we fall short of God’s character.

15. When someone sins against you, they go out of fellowship; but you
also have the opportunity to do the same. When sin goes from one person
to another, it can be contagious.

16. You must understand that their sin was paid for at the cross, and
that enables you to completely forgive them. It is not you who is paying
for that sin; Christ already did.

17. It is impossible for anyone who holds a grudge to fulfill the plan
of God. You must be at least in fellowship to do so.

Fasting – Christ’s Comment
--------------------------

Matthew 6:16-18, “16 But whenever you fast, do not become like the
gloomy hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces in order to appear to
men while fasting; truly I say to you, they have their reward. 17 But
you while fasting anoint your head and wash your face, 18 so that you
might not appear to men while fasting but to your Father who is in
secret; and your Father who sees in secret will reward you.”

Christ begins with the indefinite adverb of time HOTAN: ‘whenever.’ He
recognizes that they have a choice to fast.

It is ‘whenever you fast.’ There is no mention of a compulsory fast
here, because the fast was not ever a part of the ritual system of
Israel.

2, But it was recognized by Christ as a legitimate option. He does not
say ‘stop fasting.’ Rather, He regulates their mental attitude for
fasting.

The prohibition is a comparison with the gloomy hypocrites.

The adverb HOS compares similarities between two things. So this is a
prohibition against becoming like someone else.

The verb is the present imperative of GINOMAI, which describes something
as coming into being. This imperative of prohibition warns us against
becoming something that we are not. Since it is a present imperative of
prohibition, the action extends indefinitely into the future. It is like
saying ‘keep on not become like them.’ A real equivalent would be ‘never
become.’

The word for ‘gloomy’ is SKUTHROPOI. It can be sad, angry, sullen, or
gloomy, or really any of their synonyms. It is always related to
negative facial expression. The point is, the hypocrites put on a face
that is negative. Gloomy seems to fit well, because it matches the
sacrificial nature of the fast.

Now the disfigurement comes from the word APHANIZOUSIN, which means
literally ‘to make unpresentable.’ This is not a literal disfigurement,
but the disfigurement that anyone can do. It is making faces. They make
unpresentable faces so that they might appear to men while fasting.

Yet, fasting is not about how you appear before men. The purpose is not
to impress men with your sacrifice before God. In fact, the purpose is
not to impress God with your sacrifice.

Fasting was never intended as a sacrifice. It was a mini-Sabbath; the
setting aside of food for a better concentration on God.

Therefore, if the attitude in fasting is that God will be impressed, it
is anti-grace attitude. God is not ever impressed with what we bring to
Him; He is rather impressed with our appropriation of His grace. Fasting
could never fit into a grace system.

And the idea that man is impressed with fasting and sacrifice is even
more hideous.

The ones who fast have their reward: approbation before men. But that is
all the reward they will receive. The present tense of APECHOUSIN limits
the reception of the reward to the present time. There is no future
here.

There is much greater reward for those who have God’s grace. It exceeds
the emptiness of human approbation by a million-fold.

How empty is any pursuit of lust! Whether approbation or money or
stimulation or blood or emotion or power.

There is never satisfaction in lust. There is always satisfaction in the
reception of divinely appointed reward, because God is a fair judge.

The proper fasting procedure: anoint your head and wash your face.

This is the ancient equivalent to looking your best. Anointing and
washing would be the proper primping for a hot date in ancient Israel.

But this is curious, because it says that you are to do so not to appear
before men, but before God in secret.

So there you are, all ready for a date with God, looking your best
during your time of fast. The reason is simple: fasting is not a
sacrifice! Instead, it is a celebration because it is a time of
concentration on God.

And we do have our own parallel during the church age. Whenever you go
to study the word of God, or go into secret to pray, you should never
put on a public display as though you are making great sacrifices for
God. \<long sigh\> I am going to listen to a tape now.

Your reward is based on what you do before God, and not at all what man
might think of that. At some point you have to develop the self-esteem
necessary to break free from what people think.

a. This is the point where your love for God exceeds your love for man.
Where what God thinks is more important than what man thinks.

b. You must arrive at a place where the thoughts of God are normative
for your life, and not the thoughts of man.

c. You may appreciate the thoughts of man insofar as they reflect divine
character, for not for their own merit.

The result of the proper fasting attitude is that God will repay you.

What God pays is infinitely better than anything that man or the devil
can offer.

God is greater than man; His reward is greater than man.

Therefore, this is a vastly superior reward system.

Grace Provision
---------------

Introduction

The overall theme of this passage concentrates on priorities.

Even when the narrative turns to worry, the underlying theme remains in
priorities.

A simple way to summarize this passage is to say ‘Right priorities
eliminate worry.’

Outline.

The Treasure Teaching, vv.19-21.

The Prohibition, v.19: “Do not treasure for yourselves treasures upon
the earth, where moth and rust disfigure, and where thieves break in and
steal;”

The Positive Command, v.20: “but treasure for yourselves treasures in
heaven, where neither moth nor rust disfigure and where thieves neither
break in nor steal.”

The Summary, v.21: “For where your treasure is there also will be your
heart.”

The Lamp Illustration, vv.22-23.

The illustration, v.22a: “The lamp of the body is the eye.”

The positive application, v.22b: “Therefore if your eye is single, your
whole body will be illuminated.”

The negative application, v.23a: “But if your eye is evil, your whole
body will become darkened.”

The summary, v.23b: “Therefore if the light which is in you is dark, how
great the dark.”

The Keystone of the Passage, v.24: “No one is able to serve two masters;
for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will cling to
the one and despise the other. You are not able to serve God and
Mammon.”

The Application of the Keystone, vv.25-34.

The general statement of application, v.25a: “For this reason I say to
you, do not worry what you might eat for your soul, nor what you might
wear on your body.”

The food application, vv.25b-27.

The first basis for the food application, v.25b: “Isn’t the soul more
than food and the body than clothing?”

The first illustration of the application, v.26a: “Consider the birds of
the sky: they neither sow nor reap nor gather into barns, and your
heavenly Father sustains them. “

The conclusion to the first illustration, v.26b: “Aren’t you better than
them?”

The second basis for the food application, v.27: “And who among you
while worrying is able to add to his age one bit?”

The clothing application, vv.28-30.

The transition to the application, v.28a: “And why do you worry about
clothing? “

The illustration of the clothing application, v.28b-29: “Consider how
the lilies of the field grow; they do not toil nor do they spin; 29 But
I say to you that Solomon in all his glory was not dressed like one of
these.”

The conclusion from the illustration, v.30: “Now if God so dresses a
flower of the field (living today and tomorrow being cast into the
furnace) why not much more for you, Littlefaith?

The final conclusion, vv.31-34.

The negative command, v.31, “Therefore do not worry, saying, ‘What will
we eat?’ or, ‘What will we drink?’ or, ‘What will we wear?’”

The negative comparison, v.32a: “For all these things the Gentiles
desperately seek;”

The essence of God related to the negative command, v.32b: “and you
heavenly Father knows that you need all these things.”

The positive command, v.33: “But seek first the kingdom and His
righteousness, and all these things will be added to you.”

The final statement, v.34: “Therefore do not worry about tomorrow, for
tomorrow will worry about itself; the evil of it on that day is enough.”

II. The Exposition.

Verse 19, “Do not treasure for yourselves treasures upon the earth,
where moth and rust disfigure, and where thieves break in and steal;”

The negative adverb ME plus the present imperative of THESAURIZO adds up
to a firm prohibition in the Greek; since this is a present imperative
with durative action, the force of the prohibition extends indefinitely
into the future, and so causes the idea of ‘never treasure for
yourselves.

This goes with a dative of advantage of the personal pronoun HUMIN “for
yourselves.” The act of treasuring is an advantage to the one who does
it.

The direct object of the verb is THESAUROUS, ‘treasures.’ This is a very
comprehensive category. There are almost as many treasures as there are
people. Listen to this list of ‘collectibles’ from the Rocky Mountain
News classified:

Beer steins, Hot Wheels, Star Wars trading cards, Avalanche limited
edition Waterford crystal hockey puck, 1940’s coke cooler, Green Bay
Packers authentic footballs & helmets, Hummels, baseball cards,
jukeboxes, dolls, Barbie dolls, comics, deer head, elk head, McDonalds’
toys, slot machines, old phone booth, Richter pewter figurines, Wild
Turkey decanters.

2 way radios, jewelry, diamonds, watches, books, coins, stamps, art,
perfume and cologne miniatures, antiques of various kinds, etc.

There are two categories of treasures, according to Christ; those that
will perish in our lifetime - that moth and rust disfigure; and those
that do not - that thieves break in and steal.

The Greek word APHANIZO means to ‘make unpresentable.’ It does not mean
‘destroy,’ but merely indicates that the reason for its being a treasure
is lost. If it is something made out of iron, it oxidizes; out of cloth,
the moths eat it.

There are many other ways for worldly treasures to decay, but Christ
chooses not to go into an exhaustive list.

So there are worldly treasures which decay and lose their charm.

But what of those things that have lasting value? What of gold and
silver and precious stones that last for generations and even millennia?

Nothing is safe in this world.

The thief breaks in and steals; war comes and devours; it is lost at sea
in a storm; the divorce settlement snatches it away - and many other
causes for loss.

And of course, the greatest cause of loss of all; you die, and even
though they remain, you are compelled to leave them.

So the command of this verse is to stop treasuring away for yourselves
treasures upon the earth, for they will be lost.

The positive command is second: “but treasure for yourselves treasures
in heaven, where neither moth nor rust disfigure and where thieves
neither break in nor steal.”

Our treasures in heaven are imperishable. 1 Peter 1:3-4, “Blessed be the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to His great
mercy has caused us to be born again to a living hope through the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to obtain an inheritance
which is imperishable and undefiled and will not fade away, reserved in
heaven for you…”

Since our treasures in heaven are kept there, they are totally apart
from any measure of the devil’s world.

The resurrection body itself is a great treasure to all believers, but
there is much more than that waiting for the one who fulfills the
protocol plan for the church age.

See the Order of the Morning Star.

A thief could never break in to heaven; heaven is protection against
war, shipwreck, famine, storm, moth, rust, and even divorce (which some
will be glad to know).

So the question remains: which is the better treasure to pursue? Is it
the earthly, or is it the heavenly?

Verse 21 is a summary of the principle. “ For where your treasure is
there also will be your heart.”

The translation is simple.

For where your treasure is (present tense of EIMI).

There also will be your heart (future tense of EIMI).

So a simple principle: what you treasure, that is, what you desire, will
become the seat of all your thinking.

But this is a principle of surpassing importance. Your thoughts follow
your desires.

There are six categories of lust: approbation, emotion, blood, money,
stimulation, power.

What do you treasure? Whatever you desire, whatever you value - your
thoughts will follow.

Essentially Christ is coming down to the basis for motivation. What
desire forms a complex of thought in your soul so that you are moved to
action?

Desire is formed from conclusive thinking. You evaluate and then judge
what you like; and there is your desire. But what you now desire becomes
central focus of your thoughts, and there lies the danger.

Now in the context of the passage, if you desire the things of the
world, then certainly the world is going to become the central focus of
your thoughts.

But if you desire the things of heaven, then there will be a central
focus of thought on heaven.

10. So Christ has reversed His thesis to show a system of perpetuation;
that is, the system has its own momentum. Listen: your desires focus
your thoughts, and your thoughts form and reinforce your desires.

11. 1 John 2:15-17 is a rehash of these very principles.

15 Do not love the cosmic system nor the things in the cosmic system. If
anyone loves the cosmic system, the love of the Father is not in him.

(1) The first part of this verse is command and warning to abstain from
having high esteem for the cosmic system.

(2) If you have high esteem for the cosmic system, that is, if you like
being involved in it, then you are not in spiritual adulthood.

(3) You cannot enjoy being in the cosmic system and be a spiritual adult
at the same time.

(4) The cosmic system is the enemy and opposite of God the Father’s plan
for your life.

(5) If you are in the cosmic system, then you are an enemy of God, even
though you may be a believer.

16 Because everything that is in the cosmic system, the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes and the arrogance of life, is not a part of
the Father but is a part of the cosmic system.

(1) John divides the cosmic system into three categories: lust of the
flesh, lust of the eyes, and the arrogance of life.

(2) See the genius in this.

(a) There is a kind of lust that comes from within the body - sexual
lust.

(b) The lust of the eyes is materialism - what things in life that you
desire.

(c) And then there is a generic arrogance of life.

17 And yet the world and its lust is deceiving itself, but the one who
does the will of God remains forever.

(1) Again, the cosmic system and its components cause self-deception and
self-destruction in the cycle of lust and unhappiness.

(2) Those believers who get involved in the cosmic system lose their
rewards for eternity even though they still have eternal life.

(3) By contrast, those believers who stick it out in the plan of God
have not only eternal life, but a fantastic system of rewards as well.

(4) Tragically, those who refuse to believe in Christ do not have
eternal life, but instead are cast into the lake of fire.

The Lamp Illustration, vv.22-23.

The illustration, v.22a: “The lamp of the body is the eye.”

The kind of lamp is the LUCHNOS, a small, hand-held oil lamp. The wick
would descend from a notch in the side.

It provided light at night or in any dark place, but it was not a very
long-lasting light. It would be more comparable to the modern flashlight
than anything else.

So Christ compares the lamp to the eye. The eye is the lamp of the body,
providing light.

The eye is the reception point - and it is very common for light to be a
metaphor for Bible Doctrine.

Bible Doctrine in the soul is said to be constructed of light

(1) Psalm 43:3, “O send out Thy light and Thy truth, let them lead me;
let them bring me to Thy holy hill, and to Thy dwelling places.”

(2) Romans 13:12, “The night is almost gone, and the day is at hand. Let
us therefore lay aside the deeds of darkness and put on the armor of
light.”

(3) Ephesians 5:8, “for you were formerly darkness, but now your are
light in the Lord; walk as children of light.”

(4) 1 John 2:8, “the darkness is passing away and the true light is
already shining.”

(5) 2 Corinthians 4:6, “For God, who said, ‘Light will shine out of
darkness,’ is the One who has shone in our hearts to give the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ.”

The positive application, v.22b: “Therefore if your eye is single, your
whole body will be illuminated.”

The word for ‘clear’ is HAPLOUS. This is a transition zone for the
metaphor, so it is difficult to tell whether this word has a physical
sense or an ethical sense.

(1) It means literally, ‘single,’ or more appropriately, ‘unplural.’ It
therefore came to develop many meanings from that original theme.

(a) Simple, or uncomplicated.

(b) Of a single purpose; and from that, pure motive.

(c) Of liquids, pure.

(2) Because this is set parallel to PONEROS in the following verse, it
seems that the ethical interpretation is the best.

The eye is a common metaphor of Scripture.

(1) In Genesis 3:5-7 the eyes represent the total process of perception
and understanding: “For God knows that in the day you eat from it your
eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil.
When the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a
delight to the eyes, and that the tree was desirable to make one wise,
she took from its fruit and ate; and she gave also to her husband with
her, and he ate. Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they
knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together and made
themselves loin coverings.”

(2) Psalm 119:18 covers the realm of spiritual perception: “Open my
eyes, that I may behold wonderful things from your Law.”

(3) Ephesians 1:18-19 shows that there is a perceptive ability in the
heart related to spiritual matters: “I pray that the eyes of your heart
may be enlightened, so that you will know what is the hope of His
calling, what are the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the
saints, and what is the surpassing greatness of His power toward us who
believe. These are in accordance with the working of the strength of His
might.”

(4) In our passage, it seems to be about the perception and
understanding of light, which is Bible doctrine.

Now the body is also a metaphor for the entire life of the believer.

(1) Just as the body is biological life, so it may represent the inner
life of man; his spiritual life.

(2) The spiritual life of man may include both relationship with God and
relationship with the cosmic system.

The singleness of the eye relates to motive.

(1) If you desire light [Bible doctrine], then you will be illuminated
[live the quality of the Christian life].

(2) If you have concluded that the doctrinal way of life is the life for
you, then you will certainly fill your entire life with light.

And the interpretation of the metaphor is this:

(1) The eye will collect information according to its motive. If the
motive of the eye is to accumulate light, then the whole body will be
filled with light. Light is a metaphor for Bible doctrine, so that if
you are motivated to get doctrine with a singleness of purpose, you will
fill your life with doctrine.

(2) Certainly James had this very metaphor in mind when he wrote: “Now
if anyone of you lacks wisdom, let him ask from God who gives purely
[HAPLOS] to all and who does not insult and it will be given to him. But
let him ask in faith, judging nothing [DIAKRINOMENOS]; for the one who
judges is like a wave of the sea, being wind-blown and tossed about. For
do not let that man suppose that he will receive anything from God, a
double minded man, unstable in all his ways.”

(a) Asking from God is the equivalent of the singly motivated eye.

(b) And that God gives purely is confirmation of James’ repetition of
Christ’s principle. the motive of the eye is to accumulate evil, then
the whole body will become darkened.

The negative application, v.23a: “But if your eye is evil, your whole
body will become darkened.”

The evil of the eye is the person motivated to bring in the cosmic
counterfeits and lies; to concentrate on the inculcation of the cosmic
system.

Naturally, this darkens the life. It is destroyed through the cosmic
involvement.

The summary, v.23b: “Therefore if the light which is in you is dark, how
great the dark”

What is this ‘light which is in you’? This is an interesting phrase to
catch our attention!

It is an oxymoron. As defined by Bullinger, in Figures of Speech of the
Bible, “This is a figure, in which what is said at first sight appears
to be foolish, yet when we come to consider it, we find it exceedingly
wise. It is a smart saying, which unites words whose literal meanings
appear to be incongruous, if not contradictory; but they are so cleverly
and wisely joined together as to enhance the real sense of the words.”

The light within is the motivating factor of the soul. If you have dark
motive toward the counterfeits and lies, then your life will be dark
indeed!

The final phrase is TO SKOTOS POSON. That final Greek word is the key.
It means ‘how great.’ And so it is, “how great the dark.”

Motive is a thought or complex of thought that leads to action. If your
motive is darkness, then the darkness in your soul will be great indeed.

So this metaphor of Christ’s concentrates on motive related to the
feeding of the soul.

But you can easily perceive how this illustration fits into the overall
narrative; how the treasure and the singleness of perception are one in
the same.

Compare these two statements: “For where your treasure is, there also
will be your heart;” “Therefore if the light in you is dark, how great
the dark.” You can perceive that they are opposed to one another in an
elementary way, even though they are from different metaphors.

The keystone of the passage is verse 24, where Christ moves away from
the metaphor and into a more direct form of communication: “No one is
able to serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the
other, or he will cling to the one and despise the other. You are not
able to serve God and Mammon.”

It does begin with a metaphor, however. The general principle of the
metaphor is stated first: “No one is able to serve two masters.”

DOULEUO is the verb for serve. Our English serve is greatly watered
down. This verb means to ‘perform the duties of a slave.’ Although the
idea of benevolent service is certainly present at the time, this always
has the shadow of slavery behind it.

It does not have the idea of benevolent service; as Kittel says, “The
meaning is so unequivocal and self-contained that it is superfluous to
give examples of the individual terms or to trace the history of the
group. Distinction from synonymous words and groups is made possible by
the fact that the emphasis here is always on “serving as a slave.” Hence
we have a service which is not a matter of choice for the one who
renders it, which he has to perform whether he likes it or not, because
he is subject as a slave to an alien will, to the will of his owner.”

The master is KURIOS. Again from Kittel: “In the concept of the lord two
things are conjoined in organic unity: the exercise of power as such,
and the personal nature of its exercise, which reaches beyond immediate
external compulsion into the moral and legal sphere… KURIOS means having
legal power.”

(1) The institution of slavery was viewed differently in the ancient
world, and even through the Bible:

(2) Since there are provisions regulating slavery in the establishment
code.

(3) But if slavery were an evil institution, then why would God allow
for it regulation? We might seek an answer in two ways: through the
doctrine of dispensations, and through a closer examination of the
Mosaic provisions.

(4) The dispensational answer is inadequate.

(a) Remember, the establishment code of the Mosaic Law remains a valid
option for any nation in the church age.

(b) It was brought over because the millennial kingdom was rejected by
the Jews; the restraint of the ruling Christ and the incarceration of
the fallen angels must wait until the second advent.

(c) Divine establishment protects the freedom of all so that there might
be a perpetuation of the angelic conflict; in essence it prevents the
self-destruction of the human race.

(d) The Mosaic Law’s establishment provisions were designed for a nation
under the spiritual guidance of God; there is not an exact parallel to
the Gentile client nations of the church age.

(e) This is why no church age nation may legitimately adopt the
spiritual code of the Mosaic Law; indeed, even the establish code’s
provisions for spiritual offenders should not come into Law.

(f) The nature of slavery remains the same some 3500 years after the
giving of the Law at Mt. Sinai; it is a legitimate establishment issue;
therefore, the Mosaic provisions are as valid today as they have ever
been.

(g) The New Testament does not adopt mandatory manumission; not in the
book of Philemon, not anywhere.

(h) Christian slaveholders may reconsider their position on slaveowning
due to Christian

convictions, but they certainly have no right to force the freeing of
slaves on anyone else.

(i) The New Testament sees the institution of slavery as a legitimate
authority; “slaves obey your masters” is mentioned more than once by the
apostle Paul: Ephesians 6:5-6; Colossians 3:22; 1 Timothy 6:1.

(5) Therefore, we must study the concept of slavery more closely.

(a) There were two sources of slavery in the ancient world: poverty in
peacetime and captured prisoners in war.

· Leviticus 25:39-41, “If a countryman of yours becomes so poor with
regard to you that he sells himself to you, you shall not subject him to
a slave’s service. He shall be with you as a hired man, as if he were a
sojourner; he shall serve with you until the year of jubilee. He shall
then go out from you, he and his sons with him, and shall go back to his
family, that he may return to the property of his forefathers.” This
passage tells us a couple of things.

- That slavery was a welfare system of Israel. That is, when people
became impoverished, they could sell themselves to someone else as
slaves.

- But not all could be taken as slaves; a Jew could not accept another
of his own countrymen as a slave but instead only in the de facto sense.
He could be hired as if he were a migrant worker, which is the best
parallel to our modern times.

- The analogy to this in our own time is the Christian; you could never
in good conscience keep another Christian as a slave. Listen to the
explanation in verse 42, “For they are My servants whom I brought out
from the land of Egypt; they are not to be sold in a slave sale.”

- By working this way for a private citizen, the impoverished person
retained some measure of self-respect; there was then no slavery nor
total poverty.

- The year of jubilee occurred every fifty years; it could conceivably
be a lifetime of slavery before a person thus obliged could be set free.

- This also represents an irrevocable contract until the jubilee.

· As an effect of war many unfortunates were left in abject poverty. The
conquering nation solved this situation by enslaving the people of the
devastated land.

(b) Slaves could be bought and sold as property, Exodus 21:7. For
instance, a father could sell his daughter or son into slavery to pay
off the debts. Nehemiah 5:5.

(c) A woman could sell herself into slavery, Deut 15:1218, “If your
kinsman, a Hebrew man or woman, is sold to you, then he shall serve you
six years, but in the seventh year you shall set him free. When you set
him free, you shall not send him away empty-handed. you shall furnish
him liberally from your flock and from your threshing floor and from
your wine vat; you shall give to him as the Lord you God has blessed
you. You shall remember that you were a slave in the land of Egypt, and
the Lord your God redeemed you; therefore I command you this today. It
shall come about if he says to you, ‘I will not go out from you, because
he loves you and your household, since he fares well with; then you
shall take an awl and pierce it through his ear into the door, and he
shall be your servant forever. Also you shall do likewise to your
maidservant. It shall not seem hard to you when you set him free, for he
has given you six years with double the service of a hired man; so the
Lord your god will bless you in whatever you do.”

(d) Slaves were often acquired through trade, purchase, payment of debt,
as a gift, through birth, plunder in war, or by self-determination.

(e) Slaves were manumitted by the elapse of time (six years), Exodus
21:24, by the year of jubilee (the fiftieth year), Jeremiah 34:810,
through physical disability or being maimed, Exodus 21:26. In this case
the master was responsible to take care of the slave for life.

(f) Rights of the Master.

· He had the right to hold slaves from foreign lands as personal
property. Leviticus 25:44-45: “As for your male and female slaves whom
you may have - you may acquire male and female slaves from the pagan
nations that are around you. Then, too, it is out of the sons of the
sojourners who live as aliens among you that you may gain acquisition,
and out of their families who are with you, whom they will have produced
in your land; they also may become your possession.”

· He had the right to leave slaves as an inheritance to his children,
Leviticus 25:46: “You may even bequeath them to your sons after you, to
receive as a possession; you can use them as permanent slaves. But in
respect to your countrymen, the sons of Israel, you shall not rule with
severity over one another.”

· He had the right to hold as property the wife and children of all
slaves who were unmarried at the time they became slaves, Exodus 21:4:
“If his master gives him a wife, and she bears him sons or daughters,
the wife and her children shall belong to her master, and he shall go
out alone.”

· He had the right to punish or discipline slaves, but not to kill them,
Exodus 21:20-21: “If a man strikes his male or female slave with a rod
and he dies at his hand, he shall be punished. If, however, he survives
a day or two, no vengeance shall be taken; for he is his property.”

(g) The Rights of the Slave.

· He had the right to freedom by the purchase of his redemption, or by
the elapse of time, or in the Year of Jubilee, or he could work his way
into freedom. And because of the threefold mandates on the release of
slaves, the slave always had the hope of freedom.

· The Jewish slave had the right to good treatment, Leviticus 25:43, 46:
“You shall not rule over him with severity, but are to revere your God.”

· He had the right to marry, have children and live a normal life,
Exodus 21:5.

· He had the right to voluntary slavery where having been freed could
choose to remain a slave, Exodus 21:5ff; Deuteronomy 15:16. His request
had to be honored. This was done in front of two witnesses. The mark of
this voluntary slavery was having his ear lobe nailed to a door.

· He had the right to worship God without interference from the master,
Exodus 12:43-44, “This is the ordinance of the Passover, no foreigner is
to eat of it, but every man’s slave purchased with money, after you have
circumcised him, then he may eat of it.”

(h) The responsibility of a master to a slave is taught in Ephesians 6:9
and Colossians 4:1.

· Ephesians 6:9, “And master, do the same things to them, and give up
threatening, knowing that both their Master and yours is in heaven, and
there is no partiality with Him.”

· Colossians 4:1, “Masters, grant to your slaves justice and fairness,
knowing that you too have a Master in heaven.”

(i) Even the epistle to Philemon doesn’t advocate the abolition of
slavery, but emphasizes just treatment of slaves who are believers or
otherwise. It also gives strong emphasis on the personal option to free
slaves under principles of grace righteousness. However, this is an
option to be exercised by the individual slave owner and not the federal
government.

(j) Nowhere in Scripture is slavery portrayed as an immoral institution.
It is an institution that requires an extra helping of virtue, because
of the inordinate amount of power that the master has over the slave.

(k) It is really therefore the unvirtuous nation that should not own
slaves; the virtuous can handle it.

Therefore, the slave was under a master’s absolute authority, and could
be commanded to do many unfair (though not immoral) things.

With the absolute realm of authority, no slave could serve two masters.
This is rather like a farcical sitcom about someone trying to keep two
wives and keep them secret from one another.

(1) But here the masters are more cosmic; they are the KOSMOS of Satan,
or the plan of God.

(2) You cannot serve the KOSMOS and the plan at the same time. These
two, of all masters, put on demands that are diametrically opposed.

(3) When you are in a cosmic system of lust, you cannot please God, nor
can you fulfill His plan.

(4) When you are in God’s plan there is no way that any of Satan’s plan
seems savory.

In the verse, there are two sets of words in opposition to one another:

(1) MISO and AGAPAO are the first two; love and hate. These are the
mental attitudes related to masters.

(2) ANTECHO and KATAPHRONEO are the second pair; cling and despise.
These are a little different; the first is related to touch, while the
second is related to thought; but it is the kind of thought that would
never touch. These are simply synonyms for the preceding pair.

(3) Christ makes a very important point: the feelings that one has for
masters that are so diametrically opposed will certainly polarize after
a while. If your two masters are at war with one another, they will give
commands in opposition to one another, and you will have to choose.

Now this dovetails with what has gone previously.

(1) Do not treasure for yourselves treasures on earth;

(2) Have a single good motive.

You are not able to serve God and Mammon.

(1) MAMMON is an Aramaic word which concentrates on the business world;
it is not private property, but rather a way of doing business. That is
the exact formulation of the word in Luke 16:9,11.

(2) Therefore it is representative of the cosmic system, with all of its
lusts. This is well supported by 1 John 2:15-17, where the KOSMOS is
defined by three systems of lust.

(3) So it is, “You are not able to serve God and the cosmic system.

This is the keystone of the passage, because it summarizes the main
principle and links two concepts important to most people.

(1) The accumulation of wealth;

(2) Just staying ahead.

You see, the cosmic system can separate you from God through either
system.

(1) The accumulation of wealth can become so consuming that you are
distracted from the plan of God.

(2) Just staying ahead may develop into a fatal distraction just the
same way.

The food application, vv.25b-27. “25 For this reason I say to you, do
not worry what you might eat for your soul, nor what you might wear on
your body. Isn’t the soul more than food and the body than clothing? 26
Consider the birds of the sky: they neither sow nor reap nor gather into
barns, and your heavenly Father sustains them. Aren’t you better than
them? 27 And who among you while worrying is able to add to his age one
bit?”

Christ issues a command. The present imperative of MERIMNAO plus the
negative adverb ME gives the force of ‘do not ever worry.’ The action of
the present imperative is ongoing, and so extends the prohibition
indefinitely.

PSUCHE is the word Christ employs for ‘soul.’ It is the soul as the seat
of life. So this is not about spiritual food, as we might assume from a
first reading, but rather about the food that keeps body and soul
together.

In ancient Palestine, shelter was not considered one of the essentials.
Elsewhere it could be included in this list.

The first illustration of the application, v.26a: “Consider the birds of
the sky: they neither sow nor reap nor gather into barns, and your
heavenly Father sustains them.”

The verb TREPHEI describes the action of God the Father in sustaining
the birds. It means to feed or sustain someone who is helpless to
provide for himself.

This verb is in the present tense, and it describes the continuous
action of the Father in His provision for the helpless.

And this even in the devil’s world. It is the devil’s world, and the
Father provides for the helpless animals.

The conclusion to the first illustration, v.26b: “Aren’t you better than
them?”

This is an idiomatic translation. If it were literal, it would more like
this: “Don’t you compare favorably with them?” And even that is a fudge.

But the point is this: people are much more important in God’s eyes than
animals.

So this is a logical argument: if God takes care of the birds, and human
beings are much more important than birds, then God will certainly take
care of human beings.

There is no dispensational influence in this passage. Christ speaks of
current conditions, and not the conditions of His heavenly kingdom.

The second basis for the food application, v.27: “And who among you
while worrying is able to add to his age one bit?”

The Greek PECHUN is a cubit. It would more literally be ‘one half-yard.’
But in the English we do not add spatial measures to our units of time.
In the ancient world they were much less picky.

So Christ says that worry does not add one bit to your years, and of
course He is perfectly right.

Worry does not add to life or improve life in any way. Instead it has
the opposite effect. Worry is perhaps the worse lifestyle choice that
you can make. It ruins capacity for life completely.

The inclusion of the matter of logistics at this point is intriguing.
Remember, Christ began our passage by concentrating on the matter of
treasure. By no means is the matter of logistics comparable with the
treasures of this life. One is far below the other.

But Christ has rendered the matter of earthly treasures to the status of
a non-issue. So if earthly treasure is a non-issue, then what really is
an issue? Well, many would say logistics. But they would be wrong.

You see, Christ begins with earthly treasures, then He states His
keystone principle; you cannot serve God and Mammon. You cannot fulfill
the plan of God and at the same time please the dictates of the cosmic
system.

10. Now you see that Christ is telling us that the worldly view of
logistics is all wrong as well. Logistics is not something to be worried
over. Not even in the devil’s world.

11. The bottom line: either it’s your time to go, in which case you can
do nothing at all about it, or it’s not. And if it is not your time to
go, then God is going to provide you with the logistics you need.

12. So Christ is saying here that you can waste a lot of time and energy
in worrying about logistics, and that to do so is a great compromise of
heavenly potential.

13. And He is building up to something more. Right priorities in life
serve a dual purpose.

The clothing application, vv.28-30.

The transition to the application, v.28a: “And why do you worry about
clothing?”

The illustration of the clothing application, v.28b-29: “Consider how
the lilies of the field grow; they do not toil nor do they spin; 29 But
I say to you that Solomon in all his glory was not dressed like one of
these.”

The lilies of the field grow in one place; they do not go searching here
and there for nourishment. They are not the lilies of the garden,
carefully tended by the gardener; these are wildflowers.

The lilies find nourishment where they are, and that is it. From their
nourishment they grow their beautiful flowers.

Solomon was the wealthiest man of his time, and indeed the wealthiest
man in the history of Israel; he was arrayed in the finest splendor, and
yet he was not as well-dressed as a lily of the field.

The conclusion from the illustration, v.30: “Now if God so dresses a
flower of the field (living today and tomorrow being cast into the
furnace) why not much more for you, Littlefaith?

God dresses the wildflowers in the finest array, and they do not run
around frantically trying to provide for themselves.

And those wildflowers are here for only a season, and sometimes less
than a season. Many wildflowers in the high Rockies are there for a
couple of weeks.

Christ coins a new word, OLIGOPISTOI. It is literally ‘Littlefaith.’ It
is a descriptive word that includes a noun and adjective in one. Kind of
like fathead.

This is another great comparison. Human beings are much more important
to God than wildflowers; human beings resolve the angelic conflict, and
wildflowers do not.

So with the matter of clothing logistics, God will take care of us,
unless it is our time to go.

The final conclusion, vv.31-34.

The negative command, v.31, “Therefore do not worry, saying, ‘What will
we eat?’ or, ‘What will we drink?’ or, ‘What will we wear?’”

(1) The negative adverb ME plus the aorist subjunctive MERIMNESETE is a
very strong prohibition in the Greek language.

(2) This forms a conclusion from the preceding teachings on food and
clothing logistics.

The negative comparison, v.32a: “For all these things the Gentiles
desperately seek;”

(1) Now Christ turns to the Gentiles.

(2) The Gentiles were the unbelievers of the ancient world, separated
from Israel by their attitude toward the gospel.

(3) EPIZETOUSIN describes a frantic search for something; a desperate,
seeking action.

(4) The Gentiles frantically, desperately seek after the logistics of
life. So this would be a great insult to the Jews around Him. They hated
the Gentiles and always sought to distinguish themselves in every way
from them.

(5) So Christ mentions that this is the lifestyle of the Gentiles, and
that they, the Jews were guilty of the same thing.

(6) And the Jews of all people should have known about logistics and
should have been very relaxed about those things.

The essence of God related to the negative command, v.32b: “and your
heavenly Father knows that you need all these things.”

God is aware of our logistical needs; and we are extremely important to
Him.

A knowledge of the capabilities of God is essential to your relaxation
about logistics.

But more than that, you must add the attributes of God to the equation.

(1) He loves you; He is gracious; He is orderly; He is sovereign; He is
faithful.

(2) Understanding these things adds up to this: He wants the best for
you, He knows the best way to provide for you, He has the best plan for
that provision, He does it, and He never fails to do it.

The positive command, v.33: “But seek first the kingdom and His
righteousness, and all these things will be added to you.”

This is the priorities solution to logistics.

It is a simple solution indeed; God is going to take care of you no
matter what; and more than that, for Christ includes all the things He
has spoken about, including the treasures.

There is a catch, though. You must seek first the kingdom of God and His
righteousness.

(1) The kingdom of God and His righteousness has been already presented
in this sermon; it is the spiritual code given in the beatitudes.

(2) The spiritual code (see Beatitude Quick Review).

PROSTITHESETAI is the future passive indicative of PROSTITHEMI. The verb
means ‘to add one thing to another,’ or ‘to grant something to someone.’

Here it is more likely the latter. God grants us the logistics and even
more, the treasures of this life if we keep our priorities straight.

If you keep your priorities straight you are going to make it to
maturity. That is really the only trick to the entire process.

The simplicity of the presentation here make that extremely lucid. Seek
God’s kingdom first, and all these things will be granted to you.

So you must do these things on a daily basis; you must exercise
faithfulness in the intake of doctrine, and the rest will work out.

The treasures added are simply a preview of coming attractions in
eternity.

The final statement, v.34: “Therefore do not worry about tomorrow, for
tomorrow will worry about itself; the evil of it on that day is enough.”

This final statement operates as a kind of summary. But the final clause
is a little mysterious.

I have translated it in a very literal manner; it comes down to a
statement concerning the function of evil on every day of your life.

Evil functions every day. Every day of your life has its own challenges;
why worry about the challenges of tomorrow, then?

Keep your focus on the tests of today. And the solution to the tests of
today is Bible doctrine.

The intake of doctrine today is the solution to the challenges of
tomorrow.

Judge Not
---------

Matthew 7:1-6

1 "Do not judge so that you might not be judged. 2 For in what judgment
you judge, you will be judged; and by the measure that you measure, it
will be measured to you. 3 And why do you look at the speck that is in
your brother’s eye, but do not notice the log that is in your own eye? 4
Or how will you say to your brother, ‘Let me seize the speck out of your
eye,’ and behold, the log is in your own eye? 5 Hypocrite, first seize
the log out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to take the
speck out of your brother’s eye. 6 Do not give the holy to dogs, and do
not throw your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their
feet, and turning tear you to pieces.

Luke 6:37-42

37 “And do not judge and you will not be judged; and do not condemn, and
you will certainly not be condemned; pardon, and you will be pardoned.
38 Give, and it will be given to you; good measure, having been pressed
down, shaken, running over, will pour into your lap. For in what measure
you measure, it will be measured to you in return.” 39 And He also spoke
a parable to them: "A blind man is not able to guide a blind man, is he?
Will they not both fall into a pit? 40 A disciple is not above his
teacher, but everyone, after he has been fully trained, will be like his
teacher. 41 And why do you look at the speck that is in your brother’s
eye, but do not notice the log that is in your own eye? 42 Or how are
you able to say to your brother, ‘Brother, let me seize the speck that
is in your eye,’ when you yourself do not see the log that is in your
own eye? Hypocrite, first take the log out of your own eye, and then you
will see clearly to take out the speck that is in your brother’s eye.

Harmonic Conversion “‘And do not judge so that you might not be judged.
For in what judgment you judge, you will be judged; and do not condemn,
and you will certainly not be condemned; pardon, and you will be
pardoned. Give, and it will be given to you; good measure, having been
pressed down, shaken, running over, will pour into your lap. And by the
measure that you measure, it will be measured to you.’ And He also spoke
a parable to them: ‘A blind man is not able to guide a blind man, is he?
Will they not both fall into a pit? A disciple is not above his teacher,
but everyone, after he has been fully trained, will be like his teacher.
And why do you look at the speck that is in your brother’s eye, but do
not notice the log that is in your own eye? Or how are you able to say
to your brother, ‘Brother, let me seize the speck that is in your eye,’
when you yourself do not see the log that is in your own eye? Hypocrite,
first take the log out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to
take out the speck that is in your brother’s eye. Do not give the holy
to dogs, and do not throw your pearls before swine, lest they trample
them under their feet, and turning tear you to pieces.’”

II. Introduction.

Context.

This immediately follows the teaching on priorities.

There is hardly a transition in the Greek; simply the conjunction KAI.
It is like saying, “And here’s another thing - don’t judge.”

So this is a swift and complete transition between dissimilar subjects.

Outline. The outline follows a simple parallel structure. Christ
comments on the evils of judging, and then gets into the subject of
teachability. He does this twice.

The prohibition against judging.

The exhortation on teachability.

The judgmental hypocrite.

The metaphor of the worthless pupil.

Doctrine of judging.

III. Exposition.

The prohibition against judging. “‘And do not judge so that you might
not be judged. For in what judgment you judge, you will be judged; and
do not condemn, and you will certainly not be condemned; pardon, and you
will be pardoned. Give, and it will be given to you; good measure,
having been pressed down, shaken, running over, will pour into your lap.
And by the measure that you measure, it will be measured to you.’”

Christ sets up a simple formula: if you do not judge, you will not be
judged.

And of course this implies the opposite: if you judge, you will be
judged.

We understand what judgment is from the human frame of reference; but
what is the judgment that comes as a result of it?

It is a judgment that is outside of the one who has perpetrated the sin.
The passive voice of the verb KRITHETE confirms this. In the passive
voice, the subject of the verb receives the action but does not produce
it. This is negated in the strongest possible way, showing God’s
integrity in the matter.

So someone outside of us produces the judgment. This is certainly God.

God produces more than one kind of judgment for believers. There is the
judgment of Divine discipline in time; there is also the final
evaluation at the judgment seat of Christ.

When we judge out of place, that is a sin. Sin was judged completely and
totally at the cross, and cannot be a criteria for our judgment in
eternity.

(1) When we commit personal sins, God disciplines us. The reason for
this discipline is so that we might return to fellowship with Him.

(2) The discipline that we receive is a judgment; we cannot question the
just nature of God’s dealing with our personal sins during the span of
our lives.

(3) But that discipline is a judgment not to satisfy the justice of God
concerning our sins, but rather to motivate us to return to fellowship
with Him.

The judgment seat of Christ has a judgment based on our fulfillment of
the plan of God. It therefore has no direct connection to any sin that
we commit during our time on planet earth.

So if we commit sins, we will receive judgment. And we should certainly
refrain from sin in order to avoid the discipline that is sure to
follow.

And the discipline that we will receive is always commensurate with the
sin committed, whatever sin it is.

God is perfectly just in the giving of discipline.

You can never get away with anything that you do in the realm of sin.
This verse confirms that it is never going to be worth it.

And the application extends beyond the idea of sin in judgment to every
category of sin.

Next is a similar prohibition against condemnation. KATADIKAZO is the
verb here.

This verb concentrates on the condemnation of the innocent, and the
premature condemnation of anyone. Therefore, this serves as an
explanation of the preceding.

There is certainly a legitimate realm of judgment. God has delegated to
mankind the ability to judge within a realm of authority. This
demonstrates that the judgment and condemnation is not to fall outside
of that realm.

But people who condemn will themselves be condemned. 1 John 2:11, “The
one who hates his brother is in the darkness and walks in the darkness,
and does not know where he is going because the darkness has blinded his
eyes.”

There is a condemnation that comes in time, and one that comes in
eternity. If you are in darkness, you will certainly not gain a
favorable review at the judgment seat. And in the mean time you will
certainly receive divine discipline in time.

Condemnation cannot extend to loss of salvation. It can extend to
everything else.

Now the exhortation extends to the positive side. Pardon, and you will
be pardoned. This is a simple extension of the exhortation on
forgiveness found at the end of the Lord’s prayer. You cannot possibly
remain in fellowship and at the same time hold a grudge.

The final exhortation requires an explanation. “Give, and it will be
given to you; good measure, having been pressed down, shaken, running
over, will pour into your lap. And by the measure that you measure, it
will be measured to you.’”

First, let’s eliminate the possibility that this is a money-making
scheme. The present imperative of DIDOMI is a command that exhorts both
immediate and ongoing action. It is “keep on giving.” But there is no
specification of the object of giving.

(1) There are, of course, many ways to give from the Christian
perspective.

(2) Money is only one way to give. You can volunteer your time, your
talent, your skill.

(3) If you do give, God will definitely continue to supply your ability
to do so, if that is what He wants you to do.

(4) So even if you give money, and God gives money to you as a result of
that, it is definitely not for your enrichment. Instead, He is supplying
your pure desire to give. If that desire becomes corrupt, then two
possibilities exist:

(a) The money remains as Divine discipline;

(b) The money will be withdrawn.

Second, let’s examine Christ’s metaphor.

(1) Good measure is METRON KALON. This denotes a proper measurement of a
liquid. It is a good and proper measurement according to convention. The
vessel is therefore full, but not overflowing.

(2) PEPIESMENON is the perfect passive participle of PIEZO, which means
to press down. This action is portrayed as past relative to the main
verb, which is to come. It is an irretrievable action.

(3) So you have a good measure of some liquid, and you use something to
compress it.

(4) The next step is SESALEUMENON, another perfect participle, which
depicts the action of shaking. The vessel has been shaken. This we
cannot now undo.

(5) The present participle HUPEREKCHUNNOMENON now reveals an action in
the process of occurrence. It is overflowing.

(6) And then comes the future indicative of DIDOMI, ‘will give.’ It will
give into your lap.

(7) The metaphor then has someone doing two silly things: taking a full
vessel of liquid, you press down on the liquid with some flat surface
and then shake it. It is going to overflow! This is really quite silly.

(8) But the metaphor represents something quite important with reference
to giving.

(a) The good measure is what you give; you give prudently, but without
excess or unnecessary discomfort.

(b) Pressing down and shaking that good measure is again the action of
the one who holds the vessel; it is the one who gives.

(c) Essentially, this is interfering or messing with what is given.

(d) The result is disaster, the contents of the vessel spill over into
your lap. The metaphor clearly shows someone doing something really
stupid and paying the price for it.

(e) The moral of the story is never interfere with what God has given
you to give. Do not limit it or meddle in it in any way. Just pass it
on.

(9) Christ finishes this segment by saying, “For by the measure that you
measure, it will be measured to you.’”

(a) But this too contains a negative connotation. The explanatory GAR
effects a transition from the negative illustration to this explanation
of it.

(b) So by the measure that you interfere with the giving, God will
measure back to you in Divine discipline. The discipline will be quite
appropriate to the interference.

(c) God chooses us as His intermediaries. He gives us authority, and
employs us in provision for others. In all our endeavors we are to
represent His character; when we fail in the discharge of our
responsibility, discipline comes in proper measure to remind us of the
superior nature of God’s grace.

The exhortation on teachability. “And He also spoke a parable to them:
‘A blind man is not able to guide a blind man, is he? Will they not both
fall into a pit? A disciple is not above his teacher, but everyone,
after he has been fully trained, will be like his teacher.”

The interjection of this brief discourse on teachability and spiritual
leadership seems mysterious at first. What has this to do with judgment?

But James 1:5-8 gives us a clue: “(5) Now if anyone of you lacks wisdom,
let him ask from the God Who gives to all with single motive and without
reproach and it will be given to him. (6) But let him ask in faith,
judging nothing; for the one who judges is like a wave of the sea, blown
by the wind and tossed. (7) For that man cannot suppose that he will
receive anything from the Lord, (8) he is a double minded man, unstable
in all his ways.”

So this is about those who might desire wisdom; that is, they want to
guide their lives by the wisdom of God.

James says let them ask God.

(1) God gives with a single motive - to provide the best for His
creatures.

(2) And God gives without reproach; there is nothing that you could have
done in the past that is going to cause God to revile or insult you at
the moment that you change your mind to follow Him.

(3) Turning your priorities to the truth is a good decision; why would
God participate in insulting you at the time? The entire purpose for His
discipline in your life was to bring to this moment. There is no longer
any need for it at all.

But this one is to ask in faith, judging nothing. Why does my
translation substitute judge for doubt? It is so that you can understand
the exact meaning of the word DIAKRINO.

(1) In the active voice it means to judge or discern. That is, to use
your frame of reference in order to make distinctions.

(2) In the middle voice it means to doubt, and it is in the middle voice
here. But here is the crux of the meaning: the middle voice both
produces and receives the action of the verb. So it both judges and
receives judgement. It depicts the activity of judging self at the same
time as it judges another, so that the two are combined.

(3) So that, there is internal judgment that causes external judgment. A
judgment in the soul casts a shadow of judgment on the Scripture, so
that there is doubt concerning the sufficiency of it.

(4) Judgmental people judge Scripture.

(5) Standing in judgment against Scripture is the opposite of humility,
and you can only benefit from Scripture if you are humble toward it.

(6) Your humility must extend to Scripture as originally written and
intended.

(7) A judgmental nature against people exists because of personal
failure.

(a) The personal failure is combined with denial so that there is a
necessity to criticize all aspects of the life of others, outside of the
normal realm of authority.

(b) Being hypercritical is but one aspect of this flaw in the soul;
people who are unable to cope with their personal failures also have a
tendency to project their sins and flaws onto others who do not share
these characteristics.

(8) This judgmental nature extends to Scripture, so that the Word itself
becomes the object of the flawed person’s hypercritical nature. This
extends even to the person of God Himself.

(9) Faults are projected on Scripture, and then the word is discounted.

(10) Also common is the extension of hypercriticism and projection of
flaws upon the teachers of Bible doctrine.

(11) This will usually conclude with a statement similar to this: “I
think everyone interprets Scripture in their own way.”

Now Christ’s little parable addresses these issues.

‘A blind man is not able to guide a blind man, is he? Will they not both
fall into a pit?’

(1) You need an authoritative guide to Scripture. You cannot grow by
yourself. This is why pastors exist.

(2) The person who judges teachers of Bible doctrine and makes himself
an authority without cause is a blind man.

(3) 1 Timothy 6:3-11,17: “(3) If anyone advocates a different doctrine
and does not agree with sound words, those of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
with the doctrine conforming to godliness, (4) he is conceited and
understands nothing; but he has a morbid interest in controversial
questions and disputes about words, out of which arise envy, strife,
abusive language, evil suspicions, (5) and constant friction between men
of depraved mind and deprived of the truth, who suppose that godliness
is a means of gain.”

(a) Verses three through five confirm the truth that it is possible to
be a ‘doctrinal’ person and yet have no relationship with God.

(b) There are two points of comparison that Paul makes regarding the
doctrine of those who claim to have doctrine but don’t, and the true
doctrine.

(c) The first point of comparison is the sound words of Jesus Christ;

(d) The second point of comparison is the doctrine conforming to
godliness. So if it is not from Christ, and it is not about godliness,
that is, becoming like God in character, then it is not sound doctrine.
(e) Paul says that the person without sound doctrine has a few negative
characteristics.

He is conceited and understands nothing. Conceited means that he is
teaching doctrine for the impure motive of approbation.

the person who teaches unsound doctrine has a morbid interest in
controversial questions and disputes about words, out of which arise
envy, strife, abusive language, evil suspicions, and constant friction
between men of depraved mind and deprived of the truth.

(f) But there is also a general caveat against anyone who takes the
study of the word of God beyond the realm of godliness and into an empty
academic pursuit.

(g) This causes many evil things that divide the body of Christ at the
local level and even beyond the local level.

(h) And finally, this person supposes that godliness is a means of gain.
This is monetary gain, and so this is the transition into the part about
money. Godliness - the function of the body of Christ is not intended as
a means to material gain. It is not intended as legal tender in the
spiritual realm.

(4) These blind guides still tend to be popular; the cause is their
ability to make worldly wisdom sound truly wise.

(5) Romans 2:17-24 defines the blind teacher, “(17) But if you bear the
name ‘Jew’ and rely upon the Law and boast in God, (18) and know His
will and approve the things that are essential, being instructed out of
the Law, (19) and are confident that you yourself are a guide to the
blind, and a light to those who are in darkness, (20) a corrector of the
foolish, a teacher of the immature, having in the Law the embodiment of
knowledge and of the truth, (21) you, therefore, who teach another, do
you not teach yourself? You who preach that one shall not steal, do you
steal? (22) You who say that one should not commit adultery, do you
commit adultery? You who abhor idols, do you rob temples? (23) You who
boast in the Law, through your breaking the Law, do you dishonor God?
(24) For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of
you, just as it is written.”

(a) Paul takes his own countrymen to task here for their hypocrisy.

(b) These Jews have the infinitely wise Law of God; they boast in the
favor of God; they even know the Law well enough to become instructors.

(c) They are confident that they lead the blind to the light of the
truth, correct the foolish, teach the immature, etc. etc. etc.

(d) But the teacher must practice what he preaches, and these Jews were
doing nothing of the sort.

(e) And because of that the Gentiles were blaspheming God, hating Him
because of the Lawless activities of these Jews.

(f) And in this these Jewish teachers of the Law were blind, and they
were leading the blind.

(g) This passage therefore gives us a good definition of the blind
teacher: he is the one who is locked in to the cosmic system.

(6) 1 Timothy 1:3-7, “(3) As I urged you upon my departure for
Macedonia, remain on at Ephesus so that you may command certain men not
to teach strange doctrines, (4) nor to pay attention to myths and
endless genealogies, which give rise to mere speculation rather than
furthering the administration of God which is by doctrine. (5) But the
goal of our instruction is love from a pure heart and a good conscience
and a sincere faith. (6) For some men, straying from these things, have
turned aside to fruitless discussion, (7) wanting to be teachers of the
Law, even though they do not understand either what they are saying or
the matters about which they make confident assertions.”

(a) Paul gives Timothy the authority to command certain men to stop
teaching non-Biblical doctrines.

(b) The word PARAGGELO is simply to command, or to order someone. It is
from legitimate and direct authority.

(c) The non-Biblical doctrines are HETERODIDASKALO. HETEROS means
different or distinct from the original. This verb portrays the action
of teaching doctrine that is not a part of the Bible.

(d) They were paying attention to myths and endless genealogies that had
nothing to do with the truth.

· These teachers had probably adopted the Greek or Roman mythologies,
and were teaching it as truth. This of course would cause Paul no small
amount of indigestion.

· And they were on the subject of the genealogies, which the Jews
believed to be of great importance. They traced their genealogies for
the purpose of validating their racial purity, a complete non-issue.

(e) The pursuit of myths and genealogies give rise to speculation, which
is not helpful in the realm of doctrine.

(f) The administration of God is the OIKONOMIA, a sort of opposite word
to KOSMOS. This is the church age dispensation; not the BASILEIA, or
kingdom, but the administration which stands in its place until the
return of Jesus Christ.

(g) This administration is furthered by PISTIS, which is doctrine; the
teacher of truth must concentrate on just that; the truth.

· Furthering the administration is summarized by Paul when he says,
“love from a pure heart and a good conscience and a sincere faith.

· Love from a pure heart is love for God through the truth; love for
self in spiritual self-esteem; love for others in the function of
virtue.

· The good conscience is the ability to discern truth from a lie. This
is a conscience that is full of divine standards and is especially
cognizant of what constitutes divine character.

· The sincere faith is literally ‘unhypocritical.’ It defines faith from
the viewpoint of motive. You must pursue the Christian faith because you
love God, and for no other reason.

(h) “For some men, straying from these things, have turned aside to
fruitless discussion, (7) wanting to be teachers of the Law, even though
they do not understand either what they are saying or the matters about
which they make confident assertions.”

(i) A teacher of doctrine goes bad when he strays from the three things
that Paul has discussed. He is the blind leading the blind at that
point.

(j) Fruitless discussion is MATAIOLOGIAN - empty words. MATAIOS is a
spiritual phenomenon that describes the vacuum created when the truth is
rejected.

(k) These men have created that vacuum by rejecting both the person of
God and His word.

(l) They don’t understand what they are saying; they do not even
understand the source of their dogmatic assertions.

(m) You must as a teacher of doctrine have an ability to understand and
analyze spiritual phenomena thoroughly, and communicate it clearly.

(n) Dogma without comprehension or effective communication is totally
useless. But note: this does not rule out dogma as a means to teaching;
confident assertions are absolutely necessary in the guidance of sheep.
Anything less results in confusion.

(7) 2 Timothy 4:1-4: “(1) I solemnly charge you in the presence of God
and of Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by His
appearing and His kingdom: (2) preach the word; stand up to the pulpit
in good times and bad times; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with great
endurance and instruction. (3) For the time will come when they will not
endure sound doctrine; but wanting to have their ears tickled, they will
accumulate for themselves teachers in accordance to their own desires,
and will turn away their ears from the truth and will turn aside to
myths.”

(a) The shepherd is to preach the word; this is the defining measure of
any minister.

(b) EPHISTEMI means to stand up in front of a group. In our frame of
reference it would mean stand up to the pulpit. This is to be done in
good times EUKAIROS, and bad times, AKAIROS.

(c) No matter what the problem or challenge of the ministry, the
solution is in the word and can be solved from standing up before the
assembly.

(d) In good times or bad, the minister has to stand before his
congregation and offer the effective solutions from the word.

(e) He is to reprove, ELEGCHO; this describes the pointing out of an
error. So in the context of the pulpit, the pastor is to demonstrate
what is evil through the word.

(f) He is to rebuke, EPITIMAO; this means that the pastor is to employ
the word forcefully, going beyond normal politeness in order to place
the right tone in preaching against what is wrong.

(g) He is to exhort, PARAKALEO; this means that the minister must stand
up as the defense attorney for his congregation, lending his
professional knowledge of Bible truth to the needs of the individuals.

(h) And he is to do this, Paul reminds, in all endurance and teaching.

· The word MAKROTHUMIA is governed by a preposition, EN; it therefore is
an adverb by nature.

· Also governed by the same preposition is DIDACHE. These two work
together to show how all these things are to be accomplished. With
endurance and teaching.

· Endurance means that he is to be consistent in his plugging away at
Bible doctrine; teaching means that it is to be done in the lecture
mode.

(i) The congregation will in time desire to have their ears tickled by
myths; pleasing stories that are dramatic by nature.

(j) The myth does not contain truth; it is judged only on the basis of
its entertainment value.

(k) So the congregation will want its ears tickled with entertainment
from the pulpit, and really, Paul could care less about that.

(l) The reason is that they have no endurance for sound doctrine;
HUGIAINOUSES DIDASKALIAS is sound doctrine. It means literally,
‘healthy.’

(m) The way that a congregation loses their endurance for sound doctrine
is through their pastor; they lose it because their pastor goes weak on
the teaching of the word.

A disciple is not above his teacher, but everyone, after he has been
fully trained, will be like his teacher.

(1) This is very important, in that it points out the general principle
of authority with regard to spiritual growth.

(2) The disciple is below the teacher, learning the principles from him.
This was certainly the pattern of Christ’s ministry.

(3) So the disciple must have humility, a predisposition to obey his
legitimate spiritual authority.

(4) The perfect participle KATERTISMENOS is from KATARTIZO.

(a) It originally meant to take the wrinkles out of your robe by the
downward movement of your hands - literally to ‘straighten down’.

(b) It came to indicate every kind of straightening or renovation known
to the ancient world. But at the heart of this compound verb is the idea
that order is being made from chaos.

(c) Here are some of the other New Testament uses of this verb:

· Matthew 4:21, “…mending their nets” Also Mark 1:19.

· Matthew 21:16, “out of the mouths of infants and nursing babes you
have straightened praise for yourself.” Here the speech of the infant is
straightened out into something that can be understood.

· 1 Corinthians 1:10, “Now I exhort you, brethren, by the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that you all agree, and there be no divisions among
you, but you be made straight in the same mind and in the same
judgment.”

· 2 Corinthians 13:11, “Put yourselves in order…”

· Galatians 6:1, “Brethren, even if a man is caught in any trespass, you
who are spiritual, restore such a one in a spirit of gentleness; each
one looking to yourself, lest you too be tempted.”

· Hebrews 13:21, “…(Jesus our Lord) equip you in every good thing to do
His will, working in us that which is pleasing in His sight.”

· 1 Peter 5:10, “And after you have suffered for a little while, the God
of all grace, who called you to His eternal glory in Christ, will
Himself perfect, confirm, strengthen and establish you.”

(d) So this depicts the straightening out that must occur before there
is proper emulation.

· Everyone enters into the process of spiritual growth with a cosmic
complex; that is, a complex of counterfeits and lies accumulated from
the devil’s world.

· Inculcation of the truth straightens this out; KATARTIZO is the ideal
word to depict this process.

(e) And the perfect nature of this participle indicates that the process
must come to completion before there is true emulation.

(5) This then goes hand in hand with the preceding statement; that the
blind cannot lead the blind.

(a) For the one who is in spiritual darkness can only get out if his
guide has the light.

(b) The one without sight must follow the one who has, so that there is
recovery.

(6) Paul gives a couple of guidelines for the role model in his letter
to the Philippians.

(a) Philippians 1:29-30, “(29) For to you it has been granted for
Christ’s sake, not only to believe in Him, but also to suffer for His
sake, (30) experiencing the same conflict which you saw in me, and now
hear to be in me.”

· This is the experiential encouragement element of the role model; to
tell those whom you lead that you experience the same kind of sufferings
that they do.

· Hebrews 4:15 reiterates the principle with reference to Christ. “For
we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses,
but One who has been tempted in all things as we are, yet without sin.”

(b) Philippians 4:9, “The things you have learned and received and heard
and seen in me, practice these things, and the God of peace will be with
you.”

· This is the emulation of application element of the true role model.

· There are four components to this:

- EMATHETE means to learn something from instruction, from a teacher in
a classroom.

- PARELABETE means to ‘take someone alongside,’ or ‘to hand down a
tradition.’ This is the informal classroom of example and life.

- EKOUSATE is to hear; this lies parallel to EMATHETE.

- EIDETE is to see, and is parallel to PARELABETE.

· The Philippians are exhorted to practice those things, so that they
might have the God of peace with them.

(7) But some care must be taken with regard to the role model.

(a) Insofar as someone imitates Christ, you may imitate them.

(b) Christ is the ultimate role, and we must all strive to be like Him
in every way that is legitimate.

(c) But all human role models apart from Christ have feet of clay.

(d) General principle: subjective pre-occupation with self means
malfunction toward authority.

(e) Subjective pre-occupation with self has two parts:

· The emotional complex of sin combined with denial. This person is
filled with every kind of mental attitude sin, including worry,
self-pity, generalized anger, and bitterness toward God. Denial means
that they refuse to admit their sinful state.

· This creates an unrealistic self-image, where the self becomes a hero
or role model without justification. While holding to this false image,
the arrogant person is going to distort his relationship with God, self,
and others, to the accumulation of a tremendous amount of dissonance.
This is a miserable existence.

(f) Ultimately from this misery an external hero is found. The hero is
the one who is to rescue this miserable person from their miserable
existence.

· The rescuing hero is immediately saddled with unrealistic
expectations; since he is everything that the miserable person ever
wanted to be, an expectation of perfection is created.

· But the external hero is only a human being; he has flaws and sins
just like everyone else; unfortunately, since the miserable person has
an expectation of perfection, there is grave disappointment when the
feet of clay are discovered.

· The disappointment exists because the miserable person has projected
all of his imagined strengths onto the rescuing hero. Since the rescuing
hero is the mirror image of the miserable person’s erroneous self-image,
more dissonance comes about.

· In order to accept the flaws and sins of the rescuing hero, the
miserable person must also accept his own sinful state. This is not
often the case, though it is possible, and may be used by God.

(g) More often the miserable person will destroy his idol, and this is
called iconoclasm.

· Rather than accept his own sinful state, the miserable person will
destroy his idol in a frenzy of judgment, gossip, maligning, and all
kinds of falsehood. Forgiveness of self must precede forgiveness of
others.

· This frenzy of sin is rationalized in some way by the miserable
person, so that the sin becomes acceptable in his mind.

· These iconoclasts are the bane of all local churches; they are very
damaging.

(8) Ephesians 5:1 gives the proper perspective: “Therefore be imitators
of God, as beloved children.” Galatians 4:19 says that Christ should be
formed in us - that we should imitate the character of Christ.

(a) So the ultimate objective is the imitation of Christ through
spiritual growth.

(b) You are to imitate others only insofar as they imitate Christ; and
you really should concentrate on the original and not the copy.

(c) The attitude should be: “He is imitating Christ - that is what I
want to do.” It should not be: “He is imitating Christ - I want to
imitate his imitation.”

The judgmental hypocrite. “And why do you look at the speck that is in
your brother’s eye, but do not notice the log that is in your own eye?
Or how are you able to say to your brother, ‘Brother, let me seize the
speck that is in your eye,’ when you yourself do not see the log that is
in your own eye? Hypocrite, first take the log out of your own eye, and
then you will see clearly to take out the speck that is in your
brother’s eye.”

There are two illicit actions worth noting here; the act of looking and
the act of seizing.

Both of these illicit actions are acts of hypocrisy; there is no
credibility in them because worse conditions apply in the self than in
the problems of others.

Role model arrogance we have already studied; the hypocrisy of judgment
we have touched upon, but let’s develop it a little more.

Spiritual autonomy includes personal control of your own life while
refraining and restraining yourself from controlling and interfering in
the lives of others. This is especially true in non-essential matters.

Every time you interfere and try to control someone else’s life, you
lose control of your own life. The privacy of your priesthood was
designed for you to live your own life as unto the Lord, not to be an
expert in telling everyone else how to live theirs!

People will always do things of which you disapprove. Only when you get
to spiritual autonomy do you have the restraint to stop interfering in
the lives of other people.

Under spiritual autonomy the believer has learned to stop interfering in
the lives of others. He has been freed from the arrogant functions of
life, and recognizes the rights of others in self-determination. The
more you stop interfering in the lives of others, the sooner you have
personal control of your own life.

The only control of others is when your authority calls for it. Yet such
authority demands so much of your time that you still lose control of
your own life.

There are times when interdiction is necessary:

(1) In the giving of the gospel.

(2) In the extension of the plan of God to other Christians.

(3) In the function of encouragement where one believer fills in the
gaps of another.

Interdiction requires spiritual adulthood; tact is a great necessity,
but even more important the pure motive that comes from a more mature
love for God.

Spiritual autonomy restrains that inordinate ambition to control those
with whom you have contact. To have positive influence is one thing, but
your greatest influence comes once you no longer feel threatened in
life.

In fact, it is really the other way around, most of the time; it is
mostly people who have lost control of their own lives who have an
inordinate desire to meddle in the lives of others. It is only when that
control is regained that the restraint is possible.

But immature people always desire to look into the lives of others;
because of their own flaws, their vision is projected outward as a
defense mechanism; they cannot abide to look into the mirror and deal
with their own complexes of sin. This is one of only many defense
mechanisms, the blind fixing the blind. The blind doing eye surgery on
the blind.

There are six basic categories of neuroses. Dennis Coon, Essentials of
Psychology.

Anxiety neurosis (also known as panic disorder).

(1) This is a neurotic pattern characterized by continuous tension or
anxiety that occasionally explodes into episodes of intense panic.

(2) Anxiety attacks are the symptoms of this neurosis, and they may last
a few minutes or a few hours.

(3) In an attack, the person often feels that he cannot breathe or that
he is having a heart attack, going insane, or is about to die.

(4) An anxiety attack can be triggered by almost anything.

Phobic neurosis.

(1) Phobias are irrational fears that persist even when there is no real
danger to a person.

(2) Phobias may be attached to almost any object or situation.

(3) Phobias produce symptoms such as heart palpitations, vomiting, wild
climbing and running, and fainting.

(4) The phobic person is so threatened that he will go to almost any
length to avoid the feared object or situation.

Hysteria, also known as the histrionic personality disorder.

(1) This person has an excessive need for attention.

(2) They are often inappropriately sexually seductive in appearance and
behavior.

(3) They are overly concerned with physical attractiveness.

(4) They express emotion with inappropriate exaggeration.

(5) They have rapidly shifting and shallow emotional expression. They
throw temper tantrums.

(6) They have frequent flights into romantic fantasy.

(7) They can also experience psychosomatic illnesses, or what is known
as a conversion reaction.

(a) This occurs when anxieties or severe emotional conflicts are
converted into physical symptoms resembling disease or disability.

(b) The physical symptoms of a conversion reaction usually serve to
excuse the person from a threatening situation. Examples: glove
anesthesia, and hysterical pregnancies.

Dissociation.

(1) Dissociation is a form of neurosis marked by striking episodes of
amnesia, fugue, or multiple personality.

(2) Dissociation is the establishment of an abnormal fantasy life,
normally established in childhood, which is used to escape extremely
abusive situation.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder.

(1) Obsessions are thought or images that intrude into consciousness
against a person’s will.

(2) These may center on images of one’s own violent death, feelings of
being dirty, or just a simple loss of control.

(3) Obsessions usually give rise to compulsions, which are irrational
acts a person feels driven to repeat.

(4) Typically the compulsive act helps control or block out anxiety
cause by the obsession.

(5) Compulsive rituals make a person feel more secure by keeping
activities so structure that unexpected upsets are prevented.

Neurotic depressive reactions.

(1) Here sadness and despondency are exaggerated and prolonged for
unreasonable periods of time.

(2) The symptoms of neurotic depression are: lack of energy,
unhappiness, limited movement, an extremely negative self-image, loss of
sense of humor, and a loss of interest in other people.

(3) Neuroses are developed when a person spends an excessive amount of
time in the addiction cycle, including reverse addiction.

(4) Involvement in the cosmic system up through stage five results in an
acute disorientation to reality.

(5) If you are arrogant, become bitter towards God, reject His truth,
accept the cosmic counterfeits, and let loose of the restraints on your
lust pattern, then reality is going to be a foreign concept to you.

(6) It is very, very difficult for a neurotic to recover to a normal
life.

(7) It is only through humility and orientation to the truth that the
neurotic can recover. This may take many years.

(8) Consistent faith perception of the truth may even be painful, but
the pain of the truth is better than the pain of neurosis.

And the meddling in the lives of others is a sin; it is hypocritical
according to Christ, and is therefore to be dealt with.

But notice! The last measure of the passage commands us to remove the
log from our own eye, and then we can operate on others. Therefore this
passage does allow us to have influence in the lives of others, and it
is our duty to do so.

The secret to good influence is understanding the following:

The right motive, which is personal love for God and virtue love for
people.

The right sphere of influence, which means understanding the distinction
between essential and non-essential issues.

The knowledge which will fill in the essential gaps in another person’s
lives.

And understanding of the power of the Spirit and the need for
inculcation to fuel that power.

Right priorities, which justify and empower all functions of Christian
service.

The metaphor of the worthless pupil. “Do not give the holy to dogs, and
do not throw your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under
their feet, and turning tear you to pieces.’”

The placement of this after the statement on hypocrisy depicts the
connection between the judgmental attitude and negative volition. This
we have already studied.

Now Christ tells us not to waste our time on those who are ostensibly
negative.

There are two metaphors for the word of truth here; the holy and the
pearls.

There are two metaphors for those who have no ability to perceive the
truth; the dogs and the pigs.

A dog has no frame of reference for holy things; he does not discern
between the holy and the profane. In fact, a dog is basically a
scavenger, and he will eat anything that he believes has the least bit
of nourishment in it.

The pig does not know a good pearl from a bad one; a fake from a real.
The pig is not a very discriminating eater; he eats the slop from the
army chow hall.

Those who are spiritually blind cannot perceive the truth; they have
hardened their hearts to the point where they do not know the truth from
a lie. Worse, they have exchanged the truth for a lie. They have
reversed the natural order of things.

And this says that it is not only a waste of time to give truth to the
spiritually blind; it is also a dangerous matter; they may turn and tear
you to pieces.

Usually the tearing is of the soul; they must destroy what threatens
their blind existence, and so rhetoric is employed.

But there is also physical persecution, and the tearing of the body.

Spiritual blindness must be distinguished from the out of fellowship
state.

When you are out of fellowship, you are unable to perceive or apply
doctrine;

1 Cor 2:11-16, “For who among men knows the thoughts of a man except the
spirit of the man, which is in him? Even so the thoughts of God no one
knows except the spirit of god. Now we have received not the spirit of
the world, but the Spirit who is from God, that we might know the things
freely given to us by God, which things we also speak, not in the
academic lessons of human wisdom, but in the academic realm of the
Spirit, interpreting spiritual things by spiritual means. But a soulish
man does not receive the things of the Spirit of God. For they are
foolishness to him and he is not able to understand, because they are
spiritually examined. And the spiritual one examines all things, but he
is examined by no one. For,”Who has known the mind of the Lord, who
instructs Him?" But we have the mind of Christ."

(1) The soulish man is the one who is out of fellowship - either by
reason of no salvation of post-salvation sin.

(2) And the soulish man does not have the ministry of God the Holy
Spirit, so that he can spiritually examine the word of truth.

(3) There is a special ministry of God the Holy Spirit related to those
who are out of fellowship (see CGOOF).

Among those who are out of fellowship, there are those who want to
recover, and those who do not; those who see the need for God, and those
who deny it; those who recognize their sinful state, and those who
refuse to.

The spiritually blind have no desire to recover; they often deny their
sinful state, or at least that God is the key to recovery; they reject
the truth, and become so callused that they cannot understand the truth.

Therefore, it is beneficial to give truth to those who are out of
fellowship from God; but not to those among them who are spiritually
blind.

10. But wait a minute, how can we judge those people who are negative to
the point of blindness?

They will incriminate themselves by their negative reaction to the
truth.

And you never blanket judge those who are presently blind.

There is the employment of prayer as the ultimate weapon in these cases.

And just as they communicate their antagonism toward the truth now, when
they are positive, God will find a way to let you know of the new
opportunity.

In the mean time, the discipline of God operates toward them in order to
wake them up and shake them loose from their blindness.

Sermon on the Mount – Conclusion
--------------------------------

Matthew 7:7-29

Luke 6:31, 43-49

I. The Outline of the passage.

A. The completion of the discourse on volition, Matthew 7:7-11.

1. The quest and its promised result, vv. 7-8.

2. The metaphor of human giving; man compared to God, vv. 9-10.

3. The conclusion, v.11.

B. The statement of the golden rule, and final conclusion of the
discourse on judging, v.12 (Luke 6:31).

C. The parable of the gates, related to salvation, vv. 13-14.

D. Distinctions among prophets, vv. 15-20 (Luke 6:43-45).

1. The false prophet compared to a wolf, v. 15.

2. The metaphor of the trees and fruit, vv.16-19 (Luke 6:43-44).

3. The correlation of the metaphor to reality, Luke 6:45.

4. The conclusion, v.20.

E. Distinctions for the Kingdom from the tribulational frame of
reference, vv.21-27 (Luke 6:46-49).

1. The present attitude, Luke 6:46.

2. The future judgment, v.21a.

3. The standard for the judgment, v.21b.

4. The excuses of the damned at the baptism of fire, v.22.

5. The response of Jesus Christ, v.23.

6. The parable of the foundations, vv.24-27 (Luke 6:47-49).

F. The response of the crowd, vv. 28-29.

II. Exposition.

A. The completion of the discourse on volition, Matthew 7:7-11.

1. The quest and its promised result, vv. 7-8, “(7) Ask and it will be
given to you, seek and you will find, knock and it will be opened to
you; (8) For everyone who asks will receive and who seeks will find, and
to whoever knocks it will be opened.”

a. Whereas Christ has just finished a brief saying on negative volition,
this now turns to the subject of positive volition. The principle: God
is always faithful to positive volition.

b. Each of these three actions must be directed toward God; God must be
the subject matter. However, intermediate means may be employed to
introduce others to God, mostly people.

c. The future indicative of the verbs AITEO, ZETEO, and KROUO shows
beyond a shadow of a doubt that God is faithful to those who express an
interest in Him.

d. Perhaps the best Scriptural illustration of this principle comes from
Acts 8:25-40.

(1) Verses 25-28, “(25) So when they had solemnly testified and spoken
the word of the Lord, they stared back to Jerusalem, and were preaching
the gospel to many villages of the Samaritans. (26) But an angel of the
Lord spoke to Philip saying, ‘Get up and go south to the road that
descends from Jerusalem to Gaza.’ (This is a desert road.) (27) So he
got up and went; and there was an Ethiopian eunuch, a court official of
Kandake, queen of the Ethiopians, who was in charge of all her treasure;
and he had come to Jerusalem to worship; (28) and he was returning and
sitting in his chariot, and was reading the prophet Isaiah.”

(a) Philip had been preaching to great effect in Samaria; when the
apostles heard of his success, they sent Peter and John down from
Jerusalem to further the ministry.

(b) On their way back to Jerusalem, while they were preaching through
the villages of southern Samaria, an angel of the Lord spoke directly to
Philip, and led him to the desert road that descends from Jerusalem to
the sea at Gaza.

(c) Luke includes the fact that it was a desert road to tell us that it
was not traveled much at all.

(d) While he was descending this road to Gaza, Philip happens across an
Ethiopian eunuch.

(e) This man was everything that a Jew would despise; he was racially
and even different in appearance - he was a black man; he was sexually
incapable, something the Jews held in high regard; he was a treasury
official from the royal palace.

(f) He had been castrated so that he could be trusted in the chambers of
the Kandake. Kandake was the title of the queen, not her first name.

(g) This man had been to Jerusalem to worship God according to the
Jewish faith. The Ethiopians had a long association with Israel, going
back to the time of Solomon, when the queen of Sheba (a kingdom
including Ethiopia) visited Jerusalem.

(h) 1 Kings 10 records the visit of that famous queen; she had visited
Jerusalem to validate the claims of Solomon’s wisdom. After meeting
Solomon, this queen said (v.9) “Blessed be the Lord you God who
delighted in you to set you on the throne of Israel; because the Lord
loved Israel forever, therefore He made you king, to do justice and
righteousness.” She returned to her own land with the report. Apparently
it persisted for a thousand years.

(i) And just at that moment, in no coincidence at all, this court
official is reading the scroll of Isaiah.

(j) Now consider what he encountered in Jerusalem; prejudice and
disappointment. Remember, the Pharisees are there; Saul of Tarsus is
there. The Jews hated foreigners with a passion; they were racists of
the worst degree.

(k) It was about a day’s ride from Jerusalem to Gaza; this man had taken
a lengthy leave of absence from his important work in order to worship
in Jerusalem; imagine his grave disappointment on this, the day of his
return. He is crushed, but he is trusting Scripture and not people!

(2) Verses 29-35, “(29) Then the Spirit said to Philip, ‘Go up and join
this chariot.’ (30) Philip ran up and heard him reading Isaiah the
prophet, and said, ‘Do you understand what you are reading?’ (31) And he
said, ‘Well, how could I, unless someone guides me?’ And he invited
Philip to come up and sit with him. (32) Now the passage of Scripture
which he was reading was this: ‘He was led as a sheep to slaughter; and
as a lamb before its shearer is silent, so He does not open His mouth.
(33) In humiliation His judgment was taken away; who will relate His
generation? For His life is removed from the earth.’ (34) The eunuch
answered Philip and said, ‘Please tell me, of whom does the prophet say
this? Of himself or of someone else? (35) Then Philip opened his mouth,
and beginning from this Scripture he preached Jesus to him.”

(a) The Ethiopian had gone to Jerusalem to worship, and that he found no
help there in his spiritual quest is now obvious. He is trying to do it
on his own, and he cannot. It is certain that no one in Jerusalem had
time for him.

(b) And what Jew in Jerusalem could this man of the suffering Messiah of
Isaiah 53? And yet the man of the Scripture had only just been there,
and had only just died a few years ago.

(c) If ever there was a softball pitch in the history of the gospel,
this had to be it. Who is the man? Jesus Christ.

(3) The following verses record the baptism of the eunuch and Philip’s
passage on to Azotus and the cities of the Mediterranean seacoast.

(4) Ask, and it shall be given; seek, and you will find; knock and it
will be opened to you.

2. The metaphor of human giving; man compared to God, vv. 9-10. “(9) Or
what man is there among you who when his son asks him for bread, will
give to him a stone? (10) Or also, if he will ask for a fish, he will
not give him a snake, will he?”

a. Again Christ illustrates from the ludicrous. This illustration is
fitting to describe the nature of God’s response to positive volition.

b. “Hey dad, I’m hungry. Can have some bread?” “Here son, eat this stone
instead.”

c. “O.K., then, how about some fish?” “Here is a snake instead (tastes
like chicken).”

d. It is ludicrous. Now God is our Father, and He is perfect and good.

3. The conclusion, v.11. “Therefore if you while evil know to give good
gifts to your children, how much more your Father Who is in heaven will
give good things to those who ask Him.”

a. We are evil. That is, we are human and weak and have sin natures.

b. From our establishment consciences, totally apart from spirituality,
we know to give good gifts to our children.

c. But God is perfect and infinitely better than any of us. And all the
human race qualify as the children of God in the figurative sense.

d. He is the creator of our souls, and more our Father than any human
parent could lay claim. Human parents only produce the earthly shell;
God makes the soul.

e. And if we ask Him for wisdom, he supplies. James 1:5, “But if any of
you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all generously and
without reproach, and it will be given to him.”

B. The statement of the golden rule, and final conclusion of the
discourse on judging, v.12 (Luke 6:31), “Therefore however you want men
to treat you, so also you treat them; For this is the Law and the
Prophets.”

1. The insertion of the golden rule right here is quite significant, as
it brings to a close the discourse on judgment.

2. The expression of virtue love summarizes all that was said in the Law
and the Prophets.

3. The Scribes and Pharisees present at this sermon searched the
Scriptures all the time, but with illicit motives.

4. On another occasion, the Pharisees would attempt to trick Jesus:
Matthew 22:34-40: “(34) But when the Pharisees heard that Jesus had
silenced the Sadducees, they gathered themselves together. (35) One of
them, a lawyer, asked Him a question, testing Him, (36) ‘Teacher, which
is the great commandment in the Law?’ (37) And he said to him, ‘You
shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your
soul, and with all your mind.’ (38) This is the great and foremost
commandment. (39) The second is like it, ‘You shall love your neighbor
as yourself.’ (40) On these two commandments depend the whole Law and
the Prophets.’”

a. This Pharisee wants Jesus to commit to just one of the ten
commandments; Jesus performs a flanking maneuver on him and chooses one
from outside the ten.

b. Christ instead chooses another commandment from Deuteronomy that
serves as a guide for all function in the Christian life.

5. Love God; love others. That is it - because virtue love is the
opposite of judgment.

6. 1 John 4:7-21 review.

7. The law with regard to sinful frames of reference.

a. This golden rule that Christ has issued us remains as the greatest
common sense rule for human behavior that anyone has ever given us.

b. But here is what it does not say: however another person wants to be
treated, that is how you must treat them.

c. Rather, this golden rule demands consistency between how you desire
to be treated and how you treat others. It is a rule that when honestly
applied, eliminates all hypocrisy.

d. This golden rule does not apply with regard to sinful and even
criminal behavior; you are not required to cater to anyone’s sin nature.

e. But idiosyncrasies may or may not come from complexes of sin in the
soul. So that, if you would have others tolerate your idiosyncrasies,
that is, lay them aside so that they are not an issue to them in any
way, you must then have the same attitude in yourself.

(1) Colossians 3:12-13, “(12) And so, as those who have been chosen of
God, holy and believed, put on a heart of compassion, kindness,
humility, gentleness and patience; (13) bearing with one another, and
forgiving each other, whoever has a complaint against anyone; just as
the Lord forgave you, so also should you.”

(2) The second exhortation is from verses twelve and thirteen.

(a) Verse twelve contains a command to put on godly character, which of
course comes through faith perception of the truth.

(b) Verse thirteen mentions some ways in which that godly character
might be applied.

(c) Specifically, Godly character should be applied in these ways:

· ANECHOMENOI means to put up with someone. The idea is that you put up
with the non-sinful idiosyncrasies of others; their quirks and oddities.
It means literally ‘to have again.’ I think it may have had something to
do with in-laws.

· CHARIZOMENOI concentrates on the sinful side of things. It means to
give something free of charge and without expectation of return. Here it
is a metaphor for forgiveness

f. Furthermore, Christians must be aware that those without doctrine are
weak in their souls; extra sensitivity is therefore required (Laws of
Christian Behavior).

C. The parable of the gates, related to salvation, vv. 13-14, “ (13)
Enter through the narrow gate; “The gate is wide and the way is spacious
which leads unto destruction and many are they who enter through it.
(14) “The gate is narrow and the way has become constricted that leads
unto life and few are they who find it.””

1. The aorist imperative EISELTHATE gives a command that is to happen
immediately; since it refers to salvation, the aspect of that verb is
punctilear. Believe in one moment of time.

2. The narrow gate is one that would allow one man at a time; it is the
sally port of the ancient world.

3. Two synonyms describe the way to destruction:

a. PLATEIA - a broad thing or place; a big wide flat area.

b. EURUCHOROS - roomy or spacious, even comfy; a real-estate agent’s
word. (erratum for translation)

4. The way to destruction is broad; many have traveled that path; and
because of peer pressure and cosmic propaganda of every kind, it is by
far easiest one to take.

5. On the other hand the gate to salvation is narrow and constricted.

a. Narrow is STENE, pretty much just like our own idea of it.

b. TETHLIMMENE is the perfect passive participle of THLIBO. This verb
describes narrow from the frame of reference of a crowded room or
especially a crowded passageway.

(1) Since it is perfect passive, it describes a narrowing from outside
influence. Someone is pushing in the walls of the room, making it more
cramped. Someone on the outside has constricted the entrance, so that it
is more difficult to enter.

(2) So this word concentrates on the narrowing and constricting
activities of Satan, whereby the Gospel is defamed.

c. It is Satan’s desire to keep all unbelievers from a relationship with
God.

(1) The individual branch of the cosmic system builds up a false wall of
sin between the unbeliever and God.

(2) The propaganda branch continues to disseminate falsehood so that the
unbeliever cannot see the right way out of sin.

6. Although the way unto salvation is narrow and constricted, and few
find it, remember what Christ has just said:

a. Those who seek will find it.

b. Did Frost have this in mind when he wrote:

Two roads diverged in a yellow wood,

And sorry I could not travel both

And be one traveler, long I stood

And looked down one as far as I could

To where it bent in the undergrowth;




Then took the other, as just as fair;

And having perhaps the better claim,

Because it was grassy and wanted wear;

Though as for that the passing there

Had worn them really about the same,




And both that morning equally lay

In leaves no step had trodden black.

Oh, I kept the first for another day!

Yet knowing how way leads on to way,

I doubted if I should ever come back.




I shall be telling this with a sigh

Somewhere ages and ages hence:

Two roads diverged in a wood, And I

I took the one less traveled by,

And that has made all the difference.

Robert Frost (18751963)




D. Distinctions among prophets, vv. 15-20 (Luke 6:43-45).

1. The false prophet compared to a wolf, v. 15, “Beware of the false
prophets, who come to you in the clothing of sheep, but inside are
ravening wolves.”

a. The thing about a false prophet is this: you are a sheep, and he is a
wolf. As a wolf he wants to kill you and eat you for dinner, perhaps
with a little mint jelly.

b. But in order to kill you, the false prophet must make like a sheep in
order to put you at ease.

c. The false prophet usually makes his approach through a personality
ploy; that is, he puts on the personality that he thinks will put you at
ease. It can be any personality, really.

(1) But a personality is only the way a person outwardly expresses
themselves, and that does not necessarily match the content of the
heart.

(2) In another context, Solomon said the same thing. Proverbs 5:1-6,
“(1) My son, give attention to my wisdom, incline your ear to my
understanding; (2) that you may observe discretion and your lips may
reserve knowledge. (3) For the lips of an adulteress drip honey and
smoother than oil is her speech; (4) But in the end she is bitter as
wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword. (5) Her feet go down to death, Her
steps take hold of Sheol. (6) Who does not ponder the path of life; her
ways are unstable, she does not know it.”

d. In addition, the false prophet will say anything that you thinks you
might like to hear. He will deceive by talking in sympathy toward your
plight (see the doctrine of the Clique).

e. A false prophet can be anyone in any position in life, including, but
not exclusive to pastors. You may have a co-worker that is a cosmic
propagandist; a relative; a friend.

f. What makes someone a false prophet is the dissemination of falsehood.
They do not have to have some spiritual office.

g. LUKOI HARPAGES is the Greek for ‘ravening wolves.’ The latter word
describes the ruthless hunger of a predatory animal. Inside there is no
mercy and no feeling - and a will to devour (Lost World passage).

h. But Christ goes on to describe the distinction between false prophet
and true.

2. The metaphor of the trees and fruit, vv.16-19 (Luke 6:43-44), “(16)
You will clearly know them from their fruit. Grapes are not gathered
from thorn bushes or figs from thistles, are they? (17) So also every
good tree bears much fruit, but the rotten tree bears evil fruit. (18)
The good tree is not able to bear evil fruit; neither is the rotten tree
able to bear good fruit. (19) Every tree which does not bear good fruit
is cut down and cast into the fire.”

a. The verb EPIGINOSKO is a compound that gives greater clarity to the
action of knowing.

b. At its foundation level, it means, ‘to really know.’ So here is how
you can clearly or really know a false prophet.

c. You know them from their fruit. That is, what have they produced
within the realm of spirituality? What have they produced for you and
for others? What have they produced in their own lives? Are they living
the abundant life that is advertised in the word of God?

d. The true prophet bears good fruit; he brings himself and others
closer to God.

(1) And it is not that you destroy anyone’s privacy by checking for bad
fruit and investigating sin with every kind of evil suspicion. That is
not a healthy situation.

(2) It is the good fruit that is easily manifest; spiritual growth! The
true prophet causes spiritual growth in his congregation; the false
prophet cannot!

(3) You don’t have to go looking for bad things in the life of the
prophet; you just have to consider whether there is vital spiritual
growth under his ministry. That will certainly tell you all that you
need to know!

e. And then verse eighteen concentrates on ability; that is, false
prophets have no ability to bear fruit; true prophets are not able to
produce evil fruit.

f. This principle is given further light by Luke in his final verse. We
will wait until then to discuss it.

g. Every tree not bearing good fruit is cut down and cast into the fire;
so it is with false prophets.

(1) The timing of the verbs in the sentence is as follows:

(a) The present participle POIOUN shows an action in an ongoing state.
This is the picture of a tree that is not presently bearing good fruit.

(b) The two verbs, EKKOPTETAI and BALLETAI, are present passive
indicatives, and their present tenses indicate that their actions take
place at the same time as the not bearing.

(c) So the impression is that God steps in while the false prophet is
still at his post. But this is a wrong impression.

(2) We can rule out the possibility of the judgment seat of Christ. It
is the analogy of the fruit tree as it applies to the false prophet; but
the analogy is not to stretch too far.

(3) We have the removal and burning of the false prophet, but by whom?

(4) The false prophet is removed by us. That is, we are to remove him
from our lives. We cut down the tree and burn it.

(5) So this is the analogy. The cutting down of the tree is when you
stop listening to him; the burning of the limbs is when you dismantle
the complex of counterfeits and lies that he has placed in your soul.

(6) And churches have this responsibility among themselves, to cut down
the false prophets from among themselves.

(7) That there are so many false prophets existing in the world, and
that they are tolerated by churches and denominations everywhere is a
very bad sign. It demonstrates an absence of truth.

(8) 1 John 4 comments on this same doctrine:

(a) Verse 1: “Virtue-Loved Ones, do not trust every spirit but test the
spirits to see whether they are from God. Because many false prophets
have gone out into the world.” A spirit is one who communicates the
Word. Introduces the test revealed in v.2. Many false prophets and
Christian cults during the church age dispensation.

(b) Verse 2: “This is how we know the spirit which is from God: Every
Spirit which confesses Jesus Christ as having come in the flesh is from
God.”Hypostatic union is the key test for determining the most basic
level of orthodoxy. The hypostatic union is the two natures of Christ,
both God and man, inseparably united, without transfer or loss of
attributes, without loss or transfer of separate identity, the union
being both personal and eternal.

(c) Verse 3: “…and every spirit that does not confess Jesus is not from
God. And this is the spirit of the enemy of Christ, which you have heard
is coming and now is already in the world.” The test is not universal.
Those who admit the hypostatic union can still be in apostasy, but it is
rare. Also, knowing the true doctrine of the hypostatic union does not
guarantee spiritual maturity.

(d) Verse 4: “You yourselves are from God, children, and so have
overcome them. For greater is the one in you than the one in the world.”
Being from God means staying within the orthodox doctrines of the faith.
If you do that, you will overcome falsehood, and false teachers. The one
in us is God the Holy Spirit, who guides us into all truth through His
recall ministry.

(e) Verse 5: “They are from the world, and because of this they speak
from the viewpoint of the world, and the world listens.” The world is
the cosmic system. If you are involved in the cosmic system, you will
become a propagandist for it, and all others who are involved in the
cosmic system will listen.

(f) Verse 6: “We ourselves are from God. Whoever knows God hears us.
Whoever is not from God does not hear us. From this we know the spirit
of truth and the spirit of deception.” John is a communicator of the
truth, and those who know God will listen under his authority and others
like him. Those in the cosmic system will not. The very nature of the
matter is that positive people find communicators of the truth; negative
people find communicators of the cosmic counterfeits and lies.

3. The correlation of the metaphor to reality, Luke 6:45, “(45) The good
man brings forth what is good from the good treasure of his heart, and
the evil man brings forth evil from evil; For his mouth speaks from the
overflow of his heart.”

a. Now Luke provides us with an excellent conclusion: and it sounds more
than a little familiar.

b. Hasn’t Christ just said, in this very sermon, “For where your
treasure is, there also will be your heart”?

c. He meant a simple thing, really. What you desire will become the seat
of your thinking.

d. Now the principle is extended. The treasure of the heart manifests
itself in the thoughts, motives, words, and actions of every man.

e. So that the good man has a good treasure in his heart, and the evil
man has evil there.

f. Here Christ properly concentrates on the spoken expression of the
heart; that is, what the false prophet has to say. For it is what the
prophet says that is the worst of all. His words do the damage.

g. Illustration \#1, the words of Satan in the garden (see attached
sheet, from Origin of Life).

h. Illustration \#2, Wormtongue.

4. The conclusion, v.20, “So in conclusion, you will clearly know them
from their fruit.”

a. This is a simple reiteration of the principle.

b. The combination of ARA GE indicates the conclusion. It is the
opposite of GE ARA, which is contracted to GAR in most cases. GAR tells
you that the writer is going to comment further; ARA GE says that this
is the final part.

E. Distinctions for the Kingdom from the tribulational frame of
reference, vv.21-27 (Luke 6:46-49).

1. The present attitude, Luke 6:46, “But why do you call Me ‘Lord, Lord’
and do not do what I say?”

a. Christ observes a present trend, and then asks a question. There were
certainly those in the crowd who fell under this category.

b. They were hypocrites who outwardly called Christ KURIE, KURIE, and
still refused to do what He commanded.

c. This was the sermon on the mount; certainly there were those present
who gave their ‘Amens’ to the sermon. Who nodded outwardly with approval
as each new revelation for the kingdom was given.

d. There are two future tenses here, and they describe two actions that
go on at the same time. The first is KALEITE, calling. The second is
POIEITE, doing.

e. The calling and the doing are opposites; the one is not consistent
with the other.

f. And Christ asks this question rhetorically; He desires the crowd to
honestly consider the motives for their words and deeds.

g. Now this is a most excellent way to conclude this sermon - with a
focus on the inner priorities against the outward show.

h. ‘Doing’ here does not mean that Christ’s kingdom is a system of
legalism. There is a ‘doing’ that occurs in the soul before any ‘doing’
occurs outwardly.

i. Notice how Christ sets it up: that you can outwardly say one thing,
but not do it. So the doing more likely concentrates on something
inward.

j. And every good deed begins in the heart anyway. There is no truly
good deed where the mental attitude is absent.

k. Furthermore, Christ ties this to entrance into His kingdom, which
comes in the next verse.

2. The future judgment, v.21a, “Not everyone who says to Me, ‘Lord,
Lord’ will enter into the kingdom of heaven,”

a. There is a present tense and a future tense here.

(1) The present tense is a participle, LEGON - The concentration is on
the present action of ‘saying’ by a certain class of people.

(2) The future tense is EISELEUSETAI, from EISERCHOMAI.

b. So just because you call Christ ‘Lord’ does not mean that you will
enter into His kingdom.

c. Now we must place this in its proper dispensational setting before we
can make any further progress.

(1) For the very first time in His ministry, Christ is explaining the
nature of His kingdom and offering it to His people. This is the purpose
of the sermon on the mount.

(2) But of course His kingdom has not yet come, and apparently from this
statement it is exclusive by nature. Not everyone will enter the Kingdom
of Christ.

(3) There is therefore a panorama that extends before this moment. By
necessity of Old Testament prophecy (Since OT prophecy is a revelation
of something in the Divine Decree, it is not contingent on any other
event. And as the time is not usually set, there is no date required, as
well):

(a) There must be an atonement;

(b) There must be a resurrection;

(c) There must be an ascension;

(d) There must be a tribulation;

(e) There must be a second advent;

(f) There must be a millennium.

(4) And the millennium is the kingdom of Christ.

(a) So it is possible that many present at the sermon could enter into
Christ’s millennial kingdom.

(b) It could be as few as eight years from this very moment in Christ’s
life.

(5) Therefore, calling Christ ‘Lord’ has nothing to do with entering the
kingdom, although some who make the statement will on account of their
inner attitude. It is the inner attitude which must match up with the
outward statement.

3. The standard for the judgment, v.21b, “but [only] the one who does
the will of My Father Who is in heaven.”

a. Now Christ sets the standard: that is, what constitutes ‘doing’ so
that one enters the kingdom.

b. It is ‘doing’ the will of God. And Christ has just revealed God’s
will for the kingdom in this very sermon.

(1) But there is the will of God regarding salvation, and the will of
God regarding the Christian life after salvation.

(2) And just which is this one? It is an important question that is only
answered by the last phrase of the segment.

c. This only indicates that spiritual maturity is the requirement for
survival of the tribulation and entrance into the kingdom

d. The conditions of the tribulation are such that many immature
believers will die. God will preserve only those who depend completely
on Him.

(1) Matthew 24:9-13, “(9) Then they will deliver you to tribulation, and
will kill you, and you will be hated by all nations because of My name.
(10) At that time many will fall away and will betray one another and
hate one another. (11) Many false prophets will arise and will mislead
many. (12) Because lawlessness is increased, most people’s love will
grow cold. (13) But the one who endures to the end, he will be saved.”

(2) There is an impossibility that the ‘saving’ in Matthew 24:13 has to
with loss of salvation; eternal security is a dispensational constant.

(3) Furthermore, the use of SOZO is not limited to salvation alone. It
can also represent a saving from physical danger or even the dangers of
the cosmic system.

(4) Therefore, only those in spiritual maturity will last until the end
of the tribulation; the others will die in the persecutions leading up
to the second advent.

e. Conclusion: it is only those who remain alive at the second advent
that enter into the millennial state. But unbelievers fit this filter
just as effectively.

4. The excuses of the damned at this judgment, v.22, “ Many will say to
me in that day, ‘Lord, Lord, didn’t we prophesy in your name, and cast
out demons in your name, and do many miracles in your name?’

a. The day is the Day of the Lord; it is according to Old Testament
reckoning everything covered by eschatology from the beginning of the
tribulation to the end of the millennium.

b. The plea comes from those who have failed during the tribulation, and
they will base their plea on their works that they have done in Christ’s
name.

c. And the works are spectacular indeed; in fact, they are
manifestations of supernatural things that seem to come from God the
Holy Spirit.

d. And it is impossible to see those works as accomplished from other
means. Matthew 12:22-29 refutes this. “(22) Then a demon-possessed man
who was blind and mute was brought to Jesus, and He healed him, so that
the mute man spoke and saw. (23) All the crowds were amazed, and were
saying, ‘This man cannot be the Son of David, can he?’ (24) But when the
Pharisees heard this, they said, ‘This man casts out demons only by
Beelzebub the ruler of the demons.’ (25) And knowing their thoughts
Jesus said to them, ‘Any kingdom divided against itself is laid waste;
and any city or house divided against itself will not stand.’ (26) If
Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself; how then will his
kingdom stand? (27) If I by Beelzebub cast out demons, by whom do your
sons cast them out? For this reason they will be your judges. (28) But
if I cast out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has
come upon you. (29) Or how can anyone enter the strong man’s house and
carry off his property, unless he first binds the strong man? And then
he will plunder the house.’”

e. The result is that they have accomplished all of those things by the
power of the Spirit, because God is indeed faithful.

f. So doing great things for God in the way of Christian service is not
the same as fulfilling the plan of God for the tribulation believers.

g. In fact, the general nature of the plan of God has the standard for
spiritual maturity as a dispensational constant.

h. Since it is quite possible to perform under Christian service with
impure motives this becomes an important lesson.

i. In conclusion, God the Holy Spirit is faithful in His various
ministries related to Christian service; but anyone at any level of
maturity may tap into His power; some of those ministries, like common
grace, work completely apart from fellowship; therefore it is possible
to be a Christian service superstar and spectacularly immature at the
same time.

5. The response of Jesus Christ, v.23, “And then I will say the same
thing to them: ‘I never knew you; depart from me you who work
lawlessness.’”

a. Christ will repeat the same phrase, over and over. The command comes
in three parts:

(1) The first part is the evaluation of the relationship; there was
never a relationship between Christ and this category of people. This
would naturally preclude salvation.

(a) The verb for ‘knowing’ here is GINOSKO in the aorist tense. This is
apparently a translation of the Hebrew YADAH - the verb for relationship
knowledge.

(b) The adverb of time OUDEPOTE eliminates the chance that Christ ever
had a relationship with this person.

(2) The second part is the command which is unique to the baptism of
fire: depart from Me. This verb is APOCHOREITE.

(a) It is an ironic statement by Christ, because it is the formulaic
verb for demon exorcism. In other words, this is what you normally said
to a demon as you exorcised him.

(b) So they exorcised demons in Christ name, for the excitement or
approbation or whatever, and now He is performing an exorcism over them.

(c) So these Christian servants without God are command to depart from
the presence of Christ.

(d) Just where they are commanded to depart is found elsewhere in
baptism of fire passages.

(3) The third is the evaluation of their works. And this evaluation is
pretty stunning. These people have cast out demons and done miracles and
even prophesied in Christ’s name.

(a) An Christ identifies their working as lawlessness. Being apart from
the Law meant no good whatsoever.

(b) And more than that, it makes it perfectly clear that we can do great
things for God (apparently), and yet not even have a relationship with
Him.

(c) We can do great things for God, and not even be in fellowship with
Him.

(d) A reminder: the greatest thing you will ever do for God is fulfill
His plan for your life, and that does not add up to Christian service.

b. Now the baptism of fire comes into focus here (see attached
doctrine).

(1) The Baptism of Fire is the judgment of the unbelievers of the
Tribulation at the Second Advent. They are removed from the earth and
placed in fire for 1000 years until the Last Judgment.

(2) This involves both the Jews and Gentiles of the tribulation; and
therefore the millennium begins with mature believers only. Matthew
3:11-12, “(11) As for me, I baptize you with water for repentance, but
He who is coming after me is mightier than I, and I am not fit to remove
His sandals; He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire. (12) His
winnowing fork is in His hand, and He will thoroughly clear His
threshing floor; and He will gather His wheat into the barn, but He will
burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.” (Also Luke 3:16).

(3) Baptism in Homeric and Classical Greek. The basic definition was to
place one thing into another, so that one or the other would be changed.

(a) This meaning began in Homer’s time. Homer wrote of the giant Ulysses
who took a piece of hot metal and rammed it into Cyclop’s one eye, and
called it “baptizing.” The eye was changed by the metal.

(b) Homer’s Odyssey, book 9, used baptism for hot metal changed by water
when a smith dipped a piece of hot iron into water.

(c) Xenophon said that the Spartans baptized their spears by putting
them into a bowl of blood. The spears were metaphorically changed into
implements of killing by giving them an affinity for blood.

(d) Euripides used the word for a ship changed by its sinking. Its hull
was now resting on the bottom, instead of the surface. It was now a
completely different ship, one that sailed under the ocean.

(e) So “baptize” in the classical Greek meant to dip one thing into
another thing so that the essence of the original thing was changed by
the dipping. The change can be either real, or metaphorical.

(4) The time of the baptism of fire is the Second Advent. 1
Thessalonians 1:7-9, “(7) …and to give relief to you who are afflicted
and to us as well when the Lord Jesus will be revealed from heaven with
His mighty angels in flaming fire, (8) dealing out retribution to those
who do not know God and to those who do not obey the gospel of our Lord
Jesus. (9) These will pay the penalty of eternal destruction, away from
the presence of the Lord and from the glory of His power.”

(5) The Baptism of Fire for the Jews is predicted by the Old Testament
prophets.

(a) Ezekiel 20:34-38, “(34) I will bring you out from the peoples and
gather you from the lands where you are scattered, with a might hand and
with an outstretched arm and with wrath poured out; (35) and I will
bring you into the wilderness of the peoples, and there I will enter
into judgement with you face to face. (36) As I entered into judgment
with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so I will
enter into judgment with you,” declares the Lord God. (37) I will make
you pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the
covenant; (38) and I will purge from you the rebels and those who
transgress against Me; I will bring them out of the land where they
sojourn, but they will not enter the land of Israel. Thus you will know
that I am the Lord.”

(b) Isaiah 1:25-28, “(25) I will also turn My hand against you, and will
smelt away your dross as with lye and will remove all your alloy. (26)
Then I will restore your judges as at the first, and your counselors as
at the beginning; after that you will be called the city of
righteousness, a faithful city. (27) Zion will be redeemed with justice
and her repentant ones with righteousness. (28) But transgressors and
sinners will be crushed together, and those who forsake the Lord will
come to an end.”

(c) Malachi 3:5, “Then I will draw near to you for judgment; and I will
be a swift witness against the sorcerers and against the adulterers and
against those who swear falsely, and against those who oppress the wage
earner in his wages, the widow and the orphan, and those who turn aside
the alien and do not fear Me.”

(d) Malachi 4:1-2, “(1) ‘For behold the day is coming, burning like a
furnace; and al the arrogant and every evildoer will be chaff; and the
day that is coming will set them ablaze,’ says the Lord of armies, ‘so
that it will leave them neither root nor branch.’ (2) But for you who
fear My name, the sun of righteousness will rise with healing in its
wings; and you will go forth and skip about like calves from the
stall.’”

(6) The Baptism of Fire for the Gentiles is mentioned by Christ, Matthew
25:31-46. “(31) But when the Son of Man comes in His glory, and all the
angels with Him, then He will sit on His glorious throne. (32) All the
nations will be gathered before Him; and He will separate them from one
another, as the shepherd separates the sheep and the goats.”

(7) There are five parables that teach the baptism of fire:

(a) The wheat and the tares, Matthew 13:24-30, 36-40.

(b) The good and bad fish, Matthew 13:47-50.

(c) The ten virgins, Matthew 25:1-13.

(d) The sheep and the goats, Matthew 25:31-46.

(e) The talent test, Matthew 25:14-30.

c. Christ is trying to motivate His audience by informing them about the
coming judgment of the Baptism of Fire. He is motivating them to believe
and initiate a relationship with God through Him.

6. The parable of the foundations, vv.24-27 (Luke 6:47-49): “Therefore
whoever hears these words of mine and does them, he will be compared to
a wise man, who dug and went deep and founded his house upon the rock;
and the rain descended, and the torrent came and the winds blew and
burst against that house, and it did not fall, for it had been founded
upon the rock. And everyone who hears these words of mine does not do
them will be compared to a foolish man, who built his house upon the
sand without a foundation; and the rain descended, and the torrents
came, and the wind blew and burst into that house, and it fell and the
fall of it was great.’”

a. This is a harmony of the two passages from Matthew and Luke.

b. This is the application for the entire Sermon on the Mount. They
contain Christ’s concluding remarks about all that He has just spoken.

c. Therefore it is a parable about the effect of the Word of God in our
lives, from the gospel of salvation to the doctrines leading to
maturity.

d. “Therefore whoever hears these words of mine and does them, he will
be compared to a wise man, who dug and went deep and founded his house
upon the rock; and the rain descended, and the torrent came and the
winds blew and burst against that house, and it did not fall, for it had
been founded upon the rock.”

(1) This first section has to do with the person who is positive to the
teachings of Christ.

(2) Notice the twofold provision: hearing and doing, AKOUEI and POIEI.
They are simple verbs in the Greek. Hear and do (HAPIRU).

(3) The indefinite pronoun HOSTIS is a proclamation of the faithfulness
of God - it is ‘whoever.’ That means if you do it, God will always be
faithful in response.

(4) The point of comparison is a PHRONIMO ANDRI, a man of decisive
thinking; a wise man.

(5) This wise man dug and went deep and founded his house upon the rock,
EPI TEN PETRAN.

(6) The rock is Bible Truth; it is ‘these words of mine,’ according to
Christ. So Christ has given His kingdom offer, and described the tenets
of that kingdom in some detail.

(7) The region of Israel has no great floods as we think of great rivers
overflowing their banks. They did however have flash floods, much like
what we have here in the west; flash floods which are exceptionally
powerful by nature.

(8) There are many torrents in this world and even greater ones in the
next; there are torrents of suffering that can potentially destroy our
spiritual well-being and our most-precious relationship with God.

(9) The house is the house of our spiritual lives - it is really the
house of our souls.

(10) Suffering may destroy our mental well-being, the way we perceive
and react to the world.

e. The second half of the parable outlines the actions of a fool.

(1) The fool builds his house on the sand without a foundation.

(2) The rain is going to come; sooner or later there will be a flood of
suffering that comes.

(3) And the house without a foundation will fall, and the fall of it
will be great.

(4) Principle: suffering causes you to check your premises.

(a) Many people ask the question, “How can a loving God allow His
creatures to suffer?” In other words, suffering causes a dissonance in
the soul.

(b) This is a legitimate question that is answered completely by the
Bible, and there are two answers:

· Because they choose to suffer.

· Because suffering is designed for our own good.

(c) Because God is righteous, there exists the concept of absolute
right, and a difference between right and wrong.

(d) Because God is just, when people choose against God, they suffer,
and when they choose for Him, they are blessed.

(e) God gave people the freedom of choice, and He respects that freedom,
even when people make the wrong choice.

(f) When people make bad decisions, they must be made responsible for
those decisions, and they suffer.

(g) Suffering, however, is always for our own good, even when it is the
result of a bad decision.

(h) Also, suffering often comes through no fault of our own. We can
suffer from the bad decisions of others, or from the apparent whim of
nature.

(i) Even this category of suffering is for our own good.

(j) No matter when, or for what reason any human being suffers, it is
designed by the plan of God for the benefit of that person.

(k) The way that God works suffering for our good is a marvelous
revelation of His character.

(l) If we are in the plan of God, then we can understand suffering and
benefit from it. In essence, we can turn adversity into advantage.

(m) If we are outside of the plan of God, then the suffering is
intensified, because we do not understand why we suffer.

(n) In human history, there are two categories of people. Those who
benefit from suffering and those who do not.

(o) In life, suffering is always an agent for change, and you will
either be a better or a worse person for it, but never the same.

(5) Doctrinal orientation to life.

(a) Infallibility means that Scripture never fails to work when applied
on the basis of accurate interpretation.

(b) Inerrancy means that the original autograph of Scripture contains no
errors whatsoever.

(c) Doctrinal orientation means that you seek the truth, and then orient
your life to it.

(d) Doctrinal orientation means that there is no question too puzzling
for Bible truth to answer.

(e) Doctrinal orientation means that there is no problem too great for
Bible truth to solve.

(f) Doctrinal orientation means that the \#1 priority in your life is
the intake, inculcation and application of Bible truth.

7. The end of the Sermon… Matthew 7:28-29, “(28) And it came about when
Jesus concluded these words, the crowds were lightning-struck at His
teaching; (29) For He was teaching them as having authority and not like
their scribes.”

a. The verb EXEPLESSONTO comes from EKPLESSO. It meant to be struck by
lightning, or knocked senseless.

b. So the Sermon on the Mount was a lightning-bolt to this audience -
they were shocked by the teaching.

c. And Matthew goes on to explain why. It was dogmatic Bible teaching.
EXOUSIAN is the word Matthew employs to describe that teaching. It is
the Greek word for rightful authority.

d. And further description is given by comparison to the Scribes. The
Scribes did not teach with authority, and so the people were unused to
the concept.

e. Teaching with authority is the only way to effectively communicate
anything. When you do so, you convey to your listeners the idea that you
believe in what you say, and you know the subject matter well.

f. Sometimes scholarship is the enemy of authority.

g. There are certain elements in scholarship which lead to a righteous
dogma.

(1) It must have right motivation.

(2) It must stay within the basic framework of orthodoxy.

(3) It must follow proper and thorough methods without getting lost in
the details.

(4) It must understand the principle of necessary detail.

(5) It must have self-esteem.

Christ and the Centurion
------------------------

Matthew 8:5-13

“(5) And after He entered Capernaum, a centurion came to Him beseeching
Him, (6) and saying,”Lord, my servant has been stricken paralyzed at
home, suffering great pain." (7) And He says to him, “I myself will heal
him after arriving.” (8) And after formulating an answer, the centurion
said, “Lord, I am not worthy for You to come under my roof, but just say
a word, and my servant will be healed. (9) For I myself am also a man
under authority, having soldiers under me; and I say to this one,”Go!"
and he goes, and to another, “Come!” and he comes, and to my slave, “Do
this!” and he does it." (10) Now after Jesus heard this, He marveled,
and said to those who were following, “Truly I say to you, I have not
found such great faith from anyone in Israel. (11) And I say to you,
that many will come from east and west and recline at the table with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven; (12) but the
sons of the kingdom shall be cast out into the outer darkness; in that
place there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.” (13) And Jesus said
to the centurion, “Go; let it happen to you as you believed.” And the
servant was healed that very hour."

Luke 7:1-10

“(1) When all of His words were finished for the hearing of the people,
He entered into Capernaum. (2) Now a certain slave of a centurion, who
was precious to him, having a severe affliction was continually at the
brink of death. (3) After hearing about Jesus he sent to him elders of
the Jews, asking Him in order that He might save his slave after he
came. (4) And those appearing before Jesus were urgently exhorting Him
‘He is worthy for whom you will do this. (5) For he loves our nation and
he himself built a synagogue for us. (6) And Jesus went with them. But
when He traveled [to a point] not far from the house at all, the
centurion sent friends saying to Him, ‘Lord, do not be bothered, for I
am not worthy for you to come under my roof. (7) Therefore neither did I
consider myself worthy to come before You; but say a word, and let my
servant be healed. (8) For I myself am also a man under authority having
under my own command soldiers, and I say to this one ‘Go!’ and he goes,
and to another, ‘Come!’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this!’ and he
does.’ (9) And after hearing these things Jesus marveled at him and
after turning to the crowd following Him said, ‘I say to you, never in
Israel have I found such great faith.’ (10) And after returning to the
house the messengers found the slave permanently healed.

Exposition.

The centurion was the rough equivalent of a modern captain of infantry.
He ruled 100 men. The ISBE describes his duties in this way: “The
ordinary duties of the centurion were to drill his men, to inspect their
arms, food, and clothing, and to command them in the camp and in the
field.”

The Roman army was a tough, extremely disciplined force. They kept
themselves in superb physical condition, and were the masters of the
battlefield during this period of history.

The centurion of this story was a leader of the military outfit in
Capernaum. It was tough duty; many miles from home, and in a place that
was much different from the shores of the Italian peninsula. The Roman
military men were a hated lot, and Capernaum in Galilee was a seething
hotbed of rebellion. The Roman soldiers were alienated from the
populace, and treated like dirt by them.

But this centurion at least has an awareness of public relations while
he is among the Gentiles. He has built the Jews a synagogue and this is
evidence to the Jews that he loves their nation.

Christ was well known for healing and miracles, and the word was
spreading that He was the messiah, the king of the Jews.

This particular centurion was a conscientious man, who cared very much
for his servants. The kind of servant here is not a slave, but a
hand-servant or even armor bearer. It is the Greek PAIS. He was honored
by the centurion - ENTIMOS means to honor or value highly.

One of them fell terribly ill.

There is a clear association between the healings done by Christ and His
atonement on the cross.

The healings of physical ailments foreshadowed the healing of sin on the
cross.

The exorcisms foreshadowed the final subduement of demons.

The miracles foreshadowed the fantastic nature of the eternal kingdom.

These things validate because they are supernatural, and no one else
could do them. But they are also full of meaning.

The power of the Lord was unto Christ for healing. Luke says it in 5:17:
KAI DUNAMIS KURIOU EN EIS TO IASTHAI AUTON.

This is important. Here it says clearly, explicitly, that Christ heals
by the power of the Lord, and not by the power of His own deity as the
second person of the Godhead. This is the exact representation of the
doctrine of kenosis.

Also, there is an implication that there were times when the power was
not available. So this was a God given and directed power, and God chose
the timing. It includes self awareness of that power. In some way,
Christ could detect what was going on, and be prepared to heal.

Matthew’s gospel describes the ailment as follows:

BEBLETAI - The perfect passive indicative, third singular of BALLO. It
means literally, ‘has been thrown.’ The nature of the verb indicates a
very sudden occurrence, and even an accident. The perfect tense shows
that this was believed to be a permanent condition.

PARALUTIKOS means the servant was prostrated by his ailment or accident.

DEINOS BASANIZOMENOS concentrates on what the servant felt - continual
terrible pain.

(1) The adverb DEINOS is the same as the one included in the word
dinosaur - ‘terrible lizard.’

(2) The present passive participle BASANIZOMENOS portrays on ongoing
action that is received by the servant. The verb itself describes one
thing: physical torture.

Luke’s gospel adds these distinctions:

KAKOS ECHON is ‘having severe affliction.’ The adverb KAKOS here is
employed as a noun.

EMELLEN TELEUTAN denotes his status on the brink of death.

(1) The imperfect tense of MELLO demonstrates a continual past action,
and so he was continually about to die.

(2) TELEUTAN is ‘to end,’ but here more properly ‘to die.’ The present
active infinitive complements the preceding verb.

And when he heard about the proximity of our Lord, he immediately placed
his hope in Him for the healing of his servant. When someone is in this
kind of condition and pain, it lends a great sense of desperation and
urgency to those responsible. Such was the case here.

He sent the local elders of the synagogue to Christ with the news; they
had been at his house with concern for the slave. But it took this
centurion’s initiative to send them. He is a decisive man indeed.

And the elders plead his case before Christ.

The plead urgently, SPOUDAIOS is the adverb; it means speedily or
urgently.

They identify the centurion as a man who is worthy due to his love for
their nation and because he built their synagogue. Christ no doubt had
another definition of worthiness.

Christ offers to come heal him, without hesitation. Christ shows no
prejudice to this military foreigner. He desires to come personally.

The intensive use of the personal pronoun EGO indicates Christ’s desire
to come in person and heal the servant - “I myself will heal him after
arriving.”

The future active indicative THERAPEUSO tells us of Christ’s total
confidence in His ability to heal this servant. The indicative mood is
the declarative indicative, showing a complete correlation to reality -
this definitely will happen.

Now Christ got almost right up to the house; in some way the centurion
knew our Lord was near - perhaps he even saw Christ coming down the
street with the elders and the crowd.

And so the centurion sent his friends out and through them makes his
great statement of faith.

First, he says KURIE. This is the title of respect, given to someone of
greater respect or rank. It is quite a statement coming from a Roman
centurion, who would have outranked every Jew in the world.

Then he tells Christ not to be bothered, ME SKULLOU. This is the present
passive imperative. The implication is that the act of walking that
extra hundred yards or so would be a bother.

The centurion identifies the reason as his personal HIKANOS. This is
insufficiency or unworthiness or even incompetence.

It would have its own frame of reference for a military man who was used
to rigorous personal and professional standards.

This man identifies that he is not up to the standards of the Messiah;
this is not only true humility, but it is also the exact kind of
humility that is necessary for salvation and spiritual growth.

The centurion realizes that there is nothing he can do to impress the
Son of God; that the Messiah has superior standards that he cannot meet.

This is the prerequisite to faith: understanding your own insufficiency.
All have sinned and fall short of the glory of God.

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven!!!

Now this centurion is a commander of men; and he knows how authority
works:

You have authority, which allows you to give commands.

And those under your authority had better obey. The Roman army had a
rigorous system of discipline. Disobedience could get you killed rather
quickly.

And he has correctly identified that Christ has the authority to heal.

Christ has the authority to heal; He commands the healing although not
from His deity.

So Christ commands the power of the Spirit toward healing, and it is
done, because He has the authority.

And this is faith: the trust in someone else to have the power and
authority to exercise command over what you want done.

But Christ does not question the reason for the man’s sense of
inferiority; rather, He respects it. And more than that, He finds reason
to praise this man’s faith.

Christ calls the centurion’s explanation the greatest expression of
faith that He has ever seen.

This is because faith is simply putting your trust in someone else’s
legitimate realm of authority.

When you trust authority, you let them provide what it is they provide.
Children let their parents provide the things that they need. They trust
their authority. When parents tell their children what to do, it is
because they know what is best for their children. When the centurion
gives orders to his unit, it is because he knows what is best for them.

In the case of God, He provides salvation, and all that we need to
rehabilitate our souls after salvation. But our trust of Him is required
if we are to make these things a part of our lives.

This is why the grace plan of God has been attractive to military men
throughout the ages. They have a ready made human frame of reference for
these things.

So, faith-authority orientation, and the centurion is more than HIKANOS
to reside at the table of Jesus Christ in the kingdom of heaven.

And Christ also compares his faith to that of anyone he has met of
Jewish descent. This Gentile Roman soldier has greater faith than anyone
Christ has ever met, including Jews.

Note that Christ never once rides this man for being a soldier; that he
does not require him to repent from his soldierly ways. This was not
required. This man had likely led his men in battle, and was likely to
have killed in combat. Yet this is a man of great faith.

And then our Lord says this: “And I say to you, that many will come from
east and west and recline at the table with Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob in the kingdom of heaven; but the sons of the kingdom will be cast
out into the outer darkness; in that place there shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth.’”

East and west is ANATOLON KAI DUSMON. This is an idiomatic saying that
means ‘all over the world.’

And the context here is the future - HEXOUSIN ‘come’ and ANAKLITHESONTAI
‘recline’ are both future tense verbs.

HEXOUSIN concentrates not on the arrival, but the presence of an affair.
“There were 20 guests present at the party.”

The everyday citizen did not own chairs. The table was low, so that they
reclined at the table.

Reclining at the table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven means that you have survived the tribulation and you are now
living in the millennium.

The sons of the kingdom will be cast out into the outer darkness - this
is the imprisonment of the Jewish unbelievers from the tribulation; they
are cast into Tartarus, and share their prison with the fallen angels.

The wailing and gnashing of teeth occur because of the fear of the last
judgment at the great white throne. There is fear and utter regret.

Christ focuses on the sons of the kingdom - those who bear the
hereditary imprint of Abraham, and yet do not believe in their Messiah.
They carry the same judgment as all other believers.

Christ communicates this as a surprise to his Jewish listeners who are
all around him. They may indeed have been shocked to hear this,
considering their radical ethnocentrism.

The epilogue is this: “And Jesus said to the friends of the centurion,
‘Go, let it happen to you as you believed.’ And the servant was healed
that very hour. And after returning to the house the messengers found
the slave permanently healed.”

GENETHETO is ‘let it happen.’ This verb portrays the introduction of
something new on the scene. It is the aorist passive imperative, third
singular of GINOMAI.

The aorist tense here depicts an action occurring in one moment’s time.

The imperative of entreaty shows Christ as giving a polite command to
someone He respects.

Remember, He has authority to heal this servant; and that power comes
from God the Holy Spirit, a fellow member of the trinity.

HOS EPISTEUSAS - ‘as you believed’ - indicates that the occurrence of
the healing is commensurate with the centurion’s faith, but you have to
be careful here.

Faith is not subjective; that is, it does not depend at all on our
efforts or concentration or intensity of thought.

Rather, it is objective, so it depends on what we know about the
authority of the powers that can make it happen.

Faith always works insofar as you understand how and under what
circumstances the power and authority works in your behalf.

If there is a measure of faith, then, it is only in your understanding
of Bible truth.

Your accumulation of truth forms the limits of your faith. The more you
know, the more you can believe, the more you have.

So the centurion believed because he understood the function of Christ’s
authority in healing.

And the servant was healed that very hour. Christ had exercised His
authority, and the power came from the Spirit to accomplished His
bidding.

So the messengers, friends of the centurion, returned to his home and
found the servant permanently healed.

HEURON is ‘they found.’ A simple description of a past action from the
Greek aorist tense.

The direct object is TON DOULON, the servant.

And the description of his healed state comes from HUGIAINONTA.

(1) This is the present active participle.

(2) It describes an ongoing action extending from the present time.

(3) So the servant was not just healed temporarily, but permanently. It
was not just a death rally or a temporary state that included a death
lapse.

(4) The servant was permanently healed from his malady.

The Raising of the Widow’s Son
------------------------------

Luke 7:11-17: “(11) And it came about soon afterward, He came into a
city called Nain and His disciples and many crowds came with Him. (12)
Now as He drew near the gate of the city, and behold! An only born son,
having died, was being carried out for burial by his mother, and she
herself was a widow, and a fair-sized crowd from the city was with her.
(13) And seeing her, the Lord was deeply moved for her, and He said to
her, ’Do not cry.’ (14) And coming forward He touched the bier, and
those bearing it stood still, and He said, ‘Young man, I say to you, be
risen!’ (15) And the dead man sat up and began to speak, and He gave him
to his mother. (16) But fear seized everyone and they glorified God
saying ‘A great prophet is raised among us.’ and, ‘God cared for His
people.’ (17) And this word about Him went out in the whole of Judea and
the surrounding countryside.”

Exposition:

A. HEXES is an adverb which indicates the passage of a short amount of
time. So this occurred right after the healing of the centurion’s
servant.

B. Nain is from the Hebrew NA’IM, which means pleasant. It was on the
top of a local hill about 1500 feet high, where the views all around
were very nice. This town was located about 25 miles from Capernaum -
two or three days journey. Although Luke is less exact, they would have
arrived about the morning of the third day.

C. Christ was near to entering the gates of the town with His disciples
and many crowds. So these crowds have followed from the great events at
Capernaum and formed quite an entourage.

D. The way the Greek says it, the events that transpired came all of a
sudden. KAI IDOU is ‘and behold.’ So there they are, innocently walking
through the gates of the town, and wham! This event happens.

E. The particulars are real important.

1. A young man has died.

2. He was the only-born son of a widow. MONOGENES is only-born.

3. A fair-sized crowd was following - The Greek word is HIKANOS, or
‘sufficient.’

4. They are carrying him out for burial; he is dead indeed.

F. Today’s Handbook of Bible Times and Customs says this about the
funeral bier and procession on pages 245-246: “Funeral processions were
common among the Jews. The body was carried on a wooden bier often
consisting of little more than flat boards… …A bier carried a symbol to
indicate the deceased’s occupation or social status… …A funeral march
was hardly quiet, for the typical Jew believed in venting his emotions
by loud wailing, beating on his chest and even tearing his clothes.
Friends, mourners, and even professional mourners joined in expressing a
bitter farewell. Even the poorest family was expected to hire at least
one mourner. Singer and musical instruments, especially flutes, were
also a part of this procession.”

G. Christ had an emotional reaction to the situation - most likely
because He was thinking of His own mother and the death that He would
have to undergo.

1. ESPLAGCHNISTHE describes an emotion that comes from the depths of
being - at the very center of the soul.

1. 2. This situation really hit Him hard, and so He says to the widow ME
KLAIE, ‘Do not cry.’

3. In Christ’s mind looms His own death, and His own mother’s reaction.

4. This implies that Christ’s mother was a widow at this time.

H. And then Christ comes forward and touches the bier (SOROU) and the
bearers stood still.

1. What a moment of great drama. With the bearers you can feel the crowd
stand still - a hushed silence prevails.

2. And these words are heard by all: “Young man, I say to you, be
risen.”

a. But wait. The soul of this young man has departed. He is not there
except in body, and it has capability to hear.

b. But Christ addresses the young man directly, and gives a command to
him.

c. The guy was not faking it! The narration clearly defines him as dead
with a capital ‘D.’ (Actually theta)

d. But His command may have been one of two things:

(1) A command into the spiritual realm, which the young man could hear,
even in Hades.

(2) A command which was only for the benefit of those present (which
would have been deceptive).

(3) It should really be a combination of the two. There was a reason
that Christ made His voice audible, and there was communication heard
even in Hades.

I. And at the command the dead man sits up and begins to speak, and
Christ presents him to his mother.

1. So immediately the soul has permission to return to the body, and he
does.

2. And this animates the body so that the young man sits up and begins
to speak.

3. But there must have been some rectification of the body as well,
since by that time rigor mortis had certainly set in, and the body was
swiftly decomposing. This was a healing as well as a resuscitation.

4. And more than that, the body had been wrapped tightly with spices,
which is likely why the young man’s words are not recorded. He sat up
and said: “Mmphlmph.”

5. But very touching here is the presentation. It says literally that
Christ ‘gave’ the young man to his mother.

6. Touching indeed - ‘Woman, here is your son.’ What a fantastic gift.

7. And here is something more: John 19:23-26, “(23) Then the soldiers,
when they had crucified Jesus, took His outer garments and made four
parts, a part to every soldier and also the tunic; now the tunic was
seamless, woven in one piece. (24) So they said to one another, ‘Let us
not tear it, but cast lots for it, to decide whose it shall be’; this
was to fulfill the Scripture:, ‘They divided My outer garments among
them, and for My clothing they cast lots.’ (25) Therefore the soldiers
did these things. But standing by the cross of Jesus were His mother,
and His mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene.
(26) When Jesus then saw His mother, and the disciple whom He loved
standing nearby, He said to His mother, ‘Woman, behold, you son!’

a. Christ’s greatest gift to his mother occurred in this hour; He died
for her sins.

b. And in His mind - the gift of a son to his mother some time before.

a. J. Then comes the response of the crowd. “(16) But fear seized
everyone and they glorified God saying ‘A great prophet is raised among
us.’ and, ‘God cared for His people.’ (17) And this word about Him went
out in the whole of Judea and the surrounding countryside.”

1. This is no kidding around now. A healing is nice and certainly
miracles are fun. But raising someone from the dead - some putrefied,
rigor-mortised corpse from the dead - that is serious indeed.

2. Now there is more than entertainment; there is respect. And finally
with that respect is glorification of God. But is it? Listen closely to
their worship…

3. Christ is a great prophet; He is that, but he is indeed more than a
prophet. Jesus Christ is the Son of God! And it seems that if one is
going to worship God, there must be an accuracy of that worship for
God’s good pleasure toward it.

4. The statement ‘God cared for His people’ is one related to the
consolation of Israel, and it concentrates on the verb EPESKEPSATO. This
is in the same family as EPISKOPOS; it is the verbal form that same
noun. So God is the overseer or shepherd of Israel.

a. But there is arrogance to be found here as well. Doesn’t this imply
that God has not been Israel’s shepherd for some time? Doesn’t that call
into question God’s ability to provide for Israel, if there was a time
that He did not?

b. So God cared for His people by sending this prophet who raised a
widow’s son. What about John the Baptist? What did they say then? And
what about the Sermon on the Mount? What did they say then?

Christ on John the Baptist
--------------------------

Matthew 11:2-19

Luke 7:18-35

The report and the response.

The report: “And his disciples reported to John in prison about all
these things.”

John had been imprisoned for about a year; he had been imprisoned the
previous summer by Herod the Tetrarch, Antipas.

Herod the Tetrarch had thrown John in prison because John had criticized
him for marrying his brother’s wife Herodias.

(1) Herod the Great was his father, and he in many ways personified the
trouble in Israel at the time of Christ.

(2) For a long time, hundreds of years, the Jews had lived under the
control of one nation or another, and they longed to be truly
autonomous.

(3) It seemed like whatever empire had the upper hand in history would
rule them.

(a) If it wasn’t the Babylonians, then it was the Persians, when the
Persians took over.

(b) If it wasn’t the Persians, it was the Greeks, when Alexander came
rumbling through the ancient near east.

(c) If it wasn’t Alexander, it was the Romans, after the death of
Alexander and the disintegration of his empire.

(4) They still understood that they were a holy people, set apart for
God.

(a) They always remembered that, if nothing else.

(b) They rankled under the rule of Rome, and it especially rubbed them
wrong that Herod, the so-called Herod the Great had power over them.

(5) He was worse than a Gentile; he was a half-Jewish Idumaean, a
descendant of Esau, a wild desert-dwelling type. The Jews considered
them with no small amount of prejudice.

(6) To make matters worse, Herod was hardly a model human being. He has
been called a monster - one who was crafty and cruel, jealous and vain
and always quick to seek revenge when wronged.

(a) He came to the throne over the Roman province of Judea through
cunning and manipulation of Marc Antony.

(b) He had nine or ten wives. Even the historians lost count after a
while.

(c) On the smallest of suspicion he had even his favorite wife,
Mariamne, put to death, along with her sons Alexander and Aristobulus.

(d) Even while on his own deathbed, just days before he died he had his
own son, his flesh and blood Antipater put to death.

(e) Caesar Augustus was heard to say, “It is better to be Herod’s hog
than his own son!”

(f) Again at his deathbed he ordered all the principle men in Israel to
be rounded up and placed in the local stadium, where they could be
surrounded by his soldiers and then slain when he died. The reason: so
that there would be great mourning at his death. His sister relented and
refused the execution.

(g) To be ruled by someone who was so obviously inferior! Who was so
immoral and cruel!

(7) It must have been difficult to read the Scriptures, and to know that
their destiny was so great, and yet have the reality so different.

(a) Understand, however, that this was Divine Judgement on the nation of
Israel; that they had neglected their relationship with God, and that
the situation was appropriate to their spiritual state.

(b) In this case the outward circumstances reflected accurately the
inward condition: slavery.

(c) It is no wonder, then, there was a great fascination in the nation
of Israel with the prophecies about the Messiah.

· The one who would come and re-establish the greatness of their kingdom
and their people.

· A man who would rise up and smite their enemies and make them a free
people once again.

· From time to time a fairly great and famous man would rise up, and
there would be some excitement about the possibility of his being the
Messiah.

· Of course, things would quiet down when he turned out to be quite
human, and the slavery of Israel droned on and on.

· After a time there was even a certain amount of cynicism about the
whole deal.

· The same phenomenon exists today with the fascination about the end
times and the return of Christ.

(8) Herod tried bribing the Jews, so that they would like him, and he
could view himself as a successful ruler.

(a) Julius Caesar had given Herod a fantastic and truly royal inaugural
celebration back in 37 BC, when Herod took the throne.

(b) He always longed for that past glory, when in fact the traditional
Roman warning of “sic transit gloria mundi” applied to him more than any
other.

(c) The bribes came in the form of a building program that was the very
rival of Solomon’s.

· He built monuments and buildings in the Holy Land, and even rebuilt
their temple in magnificent fashion, topping it with a golden dome.

· The rebuilding of the Temple was much like the building of the
Winchester Mystery House in San Jose, California.

- More was added every year. A higher roof here, an annex there - all
very magnificent.

- When Herod died, his relatives took over the folly and the
never-ending program continued until it was finally finished in 66 AD,
some 87 years after it was begun.

- It is one of the great ironies of history that it was burned down just
four years later when Jerusalem was destroyed.

· Other buildings and monuments were undertaken.

- A temple, a forum, and a theatre at Samaria.

- A great Greco-Roman capital, a temple, and port at Caesarea.

- The port was an engineering marvel that even today is remarked upon by
the archaeologists who work at the site.

- Luxurious palaces and fortified retreats were built at Masada,
Jerusalem, Jericho, and Herodium, which was near Bethlehem.

- In Jerusalem he had baths, a theatre, and a Hippodrome constructed.

· He also promoted Greek and Roman games so that the people might be
entertained.

(d) All of these things struck a sour note - as any bribe to a slave
will.

· The people really did not want these things. They wanted to be
autonomous and free.

· But in order to be truly free, any people must know God, and that was
exactly the problem in Israel.

Herod had ten wives and seven sons. Four of those seven would play a
role in the New Testament. All of the wives wanted their sons to be
Herod’s successor. This was a complication.

(1) His first son Antipater was through his first wife Doris.

(2) Herod repudiated her and Antipater when he married Mariamne I, the
granddaughter of the famous Hyrcanus. This was in 37 BC Alexander and
Aristobulus were born by her.

(3) In 24 BC Herod married Mariamne II, by whom he had Herod Philip.

(4) Just a year later, he married his fourth wife, Malthace, a Samaritan
by whom he had Archelaus and Antipas.

(5) And another two years after that, he married wife \#5, Cleopatra of
Jerusalem, by whom he had Philip the Tetrarch.

(6) The other five wives bore him no sons, and only three are mentioned
by name, Pallas, Phaedra, and Elpis. He also had daughters.

Herod’s two favorite sons were those by Mariamne I, Alexander and
Aristobulus.

(1) Make note: Aristobulus married his cousin, Bernice.

(2) Make note: This union produced a daughter, Herodias.

Herod had a sister, Salome, who hated these two favorite sons, even
though her daughter Bernice was married to Aristobulus.

(1) She had designs for her own son, a certain Antipater, to ascend to
the throne of Herod. He is not to be confused with Antipater, Herod’s
first son by Doris.

(2) Salome maligned Mariamne I before Herod, and Herod believed her and
had Mariamne I killed.

(3) The two sons were naturally indignant, and threatened to bring
charges before Caesar that would cause him to lose his throne.

(4) And as a consequence Herod changed his will so that Antipater by
Doris was named the sole heir to the throne. He then sent Antipater to
the emperor to have the will ratified.

(5) Realizing that being gone from Herod’s presence was a dangerous
thing, Antipater wrote slanderous letter against Alexander and
Aristobulus from Rome.

(6) As a result of this slander, Herod had these two tried before Caesar
Augustus in 12 BC Amazingly, the court system worked, and they were
found not guilty on all counts, and more than that, they were reconciled
to their father, and to Antipater as well.

(7) Herod changed his will to name all three sons equally.

(8) But Salome, Herod’s sister, was not finished yet. Together with
brother Pheroras and son Antipater, the slander began again against the
two sons of Mariamne I.

(a) This time they obtained the testimony of one friend of Alexander’s,
and on the basis of a single eyewitness they convinced Herod that the
two were plotting Herod’s death and planning to lay claim to the throne
before Rome.

(b) Alexander was cast into prison, but thanks to Alexander’s
father-in-law, he was set free and reconciled to Herod.

In the next round, Antipater convinced his friend Eurycles from Sparta
to play Alexander and Aristobulus against Herod. They fell for it, and
were caught in the plotting phase.

(1) Herod became so suspicious that he once again imprisoned the
brothers, and accused them of treason.

(2) Herod sent to Rome seeking the Emperor’s advice regarding his sons,
and Augustus gave Herod full authority to deal with his sons as he
wished, but advised to him to conduct a Roman trial outside of his own
territory. He feared that without a change of venue there would be a
rebellion.

(3) The trial was conducted in Berytus (Beirut), and a guilty verdict
was passed. The two sons Alexander and Aristobulus were executed by
strangulation in 7 BC

(4) Herod’s fourth will now named Antipater by Doris his sole successor.

But Antipater was an impatient man…

(1) He held secret conferences with Herod’s brother Pheroras. They
intended to kill the old man.

(2) Salome, Herod’s sister, got wind of these meetings and spilled the
beans to Herod.

(3) Thus Herod’s relationship with his sole named heir became somewhat
strained.

(4) Antipater then arranged to have emperor Augustus summon him to Rome,
with the excuse that the new will needed ratification. He was then
conveniently out of town.

(5) Pheroras, Herod’s brother and Antipater’s uncle died. Herod
conducted an investigation, and discovered that not only did Pheroras
die of poison, but also that same poison had been intended for him.

(6) Herod recalled Antipater under false pretenses, and he thus returned
without suspicion. He was thrown into prison, tried the next day and
found guilty. It took some time, however to gain permission to execute
Antipater, but eventually it was done.

(7) And so Herod had another will drawn up. Since his two oldest living
sons had been turned against him by Antipater, that is, Herod Philip by
Mariamne II and Archelaus by Malthace, he excluded them from will \#6.
Everything now went to Antipas by Malthace.

Herod was by now old and feeble and full of disease. Nothing could ease
his discomfort, soul and body.

It was around this time that Christ was born, and everyone was talking
about the new-born true king of the Jews. Herod’s paranoia was at an
all-time high, and so he was motivated to kill all those children in
Bethlehem.

And at the same time, two rabbis incited the people to tear down the
Roman eagle from the temple gate. The offenders were seized and burned
alive.

And just then he made his final will, naming Archelaus of Malthace as
king, Antipas of Malthace as Tetrarch of Galilee and Perea, and their
half-brother Philip of Cleopatra of Jerusalem as the Tetrarch of
Gaulanitis, Trachonitis, Batanea, and Paneas.

k. But of course the last will was disputed, because it was made just
five days before Herod’s death, and it needed the emperor’s
ratification.

(1) Archelaus was the de facto ruler during this time. During the next
Passover, a crowd gathered before Archelaus and began to demand
retribution for the deaths of those killed by his father during the
eagle incident.

(2) The crowd turned ugly when Archelaus refused this retribution, and
so he ordered the troops in. Three thousand people were killed. Not a
good start.

(3) Immediately after this, Archelaus and Antipas went to Rome together,
each to claim before the emperor the will which benefited himself.
Archelaus said the last will always counts, while Antipas said the last
will was not made by a mentally well Herod. It must have been an
interesting boat ride. Philip was left behind to manage matters.

(4) While these were in Rome, another riot broke out during Pentecost,
and this went on for about two months and many more deaths.

(5) The Jews therefore sent a delegation to Rome, pleading for their
lives and their autonomy.

(6) Philip got nervous about everyone being in Rome, so he went too.

(7) Augustus, thoroughly tired by the whole mess by now, issued a
compromise.

(a) Archelaus was made ruler over Idumea, Judea, and Samaria with the
special title of Ethnarch. He was promised kingship if he ruled well.

(b) Antipas was made tetrarch over Galilee and Perea.

(c) And Philip was given Gaulanitis, Trachonitis, Batanea, and Paneas as
tetrarch. (See map)

l. Archelaus reign as ethnarch was characterized by brutality and
tyranny, even though like his father he tried to bribe the people by
building things.

(1) In AD 6 the Jews and Samaritans joined together in a delegation to
Rome, where they complained to the emperor. Antipas and Philip the
Tetrarch also went because they felt Archelaus had neglected their
territories.

(2) Archelaus was then deposed and exiled to the south of France.

(3) Archelaus territory then became an imperial province under direct
Roman rule.

m. Antipas was the ruler over Galilee, the central area of most of
Christ’s ministry.

(1) He first undertook a rebuilding program to fix the destruction of
the revolt of 4 BC Sepphoris was the largest city of Galilee. It was
rebuilt, and since it was just 4 miles from Nazareth it is likely that
Joseph, a carpenter, worked on the project.

(2) Tiberias was a new city founded under his building program. But
while they were building, the builders struck on the site of an old
cemetery, and thus the whole area became unclean to the Jews. He
therefore enticed people there by offering free homes and lands and tax
exemption for the first few years.

(3) Antipas married the daughter of the Nabatean king Aretas IV, an
Arab. This added to Antipas’ realm, and to Caesar Augustus’ tax base.

(4) In AD 28 or 29, Antipas decided to go to Rome, and on the way to
visit his half-brother Herod Philip, who lived down on the seacoast.

(5) Now Herod Philip had married his brother Aristobulus’ daughter,
whose name was Herodias. You remember her. Well… Herodias was a very
beautiful woman, and Antipas fell in love with her; his own niece and
sister-in-law.

(6) Now Herodias was a typical scheming member of the Herod family, and
she secretly agreed to divorce Herod Philip and marry Antipas, provided
that he divorce the daughter of Aretas IV.

(7) Somehow, Antipas’ first wife discovered the plan, and fled to her
father. Aretas took the whole deal as an insult, and a few years later
attacked and defeated Antipas in a battle.

n. But John the Baptist took offence at this incestual marriage, and let
off steam about it. This is why he was thrown into prison - Matthew
14:3.

o. Later Herodias would connive to have John killed as retribution for
stirring up the people against her behavior - Matthew 14:1-12.

p. Antipas was greatly fascinated with the ministry of Christ, and
longed to see His miracles.

(1) And when Pilate had custody of Christ and understood our Lord to be
a citizen of Galilee, he sent him to Antipas, for it was under his
jurisdiction. Herod Antipas was there for the feast of the Passover.

(2) Luke 23:8-12 records what happened. “(8) Now Herod was very glad
when he saw Jesus; for he had wanted to see Him for a long time, because
he had been hearing about Him and was hoping to see some sign performed
by Him. (9) And he questioned Him at some length; but He answered him
nothing. (10) And the chief priests and the scribes were standing there,
accusing Him vehemently. (11) And Herod with his soldiers, after
treating Him with contempt and mocking Him, dressed Him in a gorgeous
robe and sent Him back to Pilate. (12) Now Herod and Pilate became
friends with one another that very day; for before they had been enemies
with each other.”

(3) Antipas identified himself with the Jews by treating their enemy as
his enemy also. He may also have been outraged that Christ gave him no
show.

2. But John’s disciples kept him informed with all the happenings on the
outside, and especially the happenings in the life of Jesus.

B. John’s response is cold: “And summoning some two of his disciples
John sent to the Lord, saying, ‘Are you the coming one or do we expect
another?’”

1. It is cold because he hears all these great things about Christ, and
yet he does not see Christ as the Messiah.

2. And why is that? How could you deny Christ as the Messiah when you
hear all of these things about him?

3. It had to do with personal circumstances. John was in prison, put
there by his enemy and the enemy of Israel. That in John’s mind Christ
had done nothing to free him (which was the law of volitional
responsibility), nor to free his people from the Herodian tyranny was
enough to deny Jesus as the Messiah.

4. This is the classic cosmic rationale.

a. John was suffering because of his own stubborn efforts in clinging
too long to his ministry, and his shift of focus from the Pharisees to
the Herodians.

b. But John refused to see that in his state of spiritual blindness, and
so he shifted the blame to Jesus.

c. He concluded that Jesus could not be the Messiah, because He had not
freed him, when that was so obviously what any Messiah should do.

d. Suddenly God was not God because John had not gotten his way. And
because of his spiritual malfunction, John had become like his worst
enemies, the Pharisees.

5. John must indeed have been suffering from spiritual blindness.

II. Christ’s Reply to John. “And after they appeared beside Him the men
said, ‘John the Baptist sent us to you, saying, ‘Are you the coming one
or do we expect another?’ In that hour He healed many from illness and
disease and evil spirits and to many blind He freely gave to see. And
after formulating an answer, He said to them, ‘After you arrive proclaim
to John what you saw and heard; blind men see again, lame men walk,
lepers are cleansed and deaf men hear, dead men are raised, poor men are
evangelized. And blessed is anyone who does not stumble over Me.”

A. Now John had heard of the miracles, but not seen them.

1. Remember, John has never seen the miracles of Jesus Christ, other
than the approving proclamation and the dove at Christ’s baptism.

2. And that incident did not contain a miracle under Christ’s
initiative, but came direct from the Father.

B. And Christ performed many of the miracles right before John’s
disciples, so that they could validate the occurrences back to John
personally. They had witnessed the entire thing, and the eyewitness is
by far the most effective witness of all.

1. By seeing it with their own eyes, the disciples of John could move
away from the self-testimony of Christ to their testimony.

2. This harkens back to the testimony of Andrew for Peter. John 1:35ff:
“Again the next day John was standing with two of his disciples, and he
looked upon Jesus as He walked, and said, ‘Behold, the Lamb of God!" And
the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus. And Jesus
turned, and beheld them following, and said to them, ’What do you seek?’
And they said to Him, ‘Rabbi [which translated means Teacher], where are
you staying?’ He said to them, ‘Come, and you will see.’ They came
therefore and saw where He was staying; and they stayed with Him that
day, for it was about the tenth hour. One of the two who heard John
speak, and followed Him, was Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother. He found
first his own brother Simon, and said to him, ‘We have found the
Messiah’ [which translated means Christ]. He brought him to Jesus.”

3. But now this places a requirement on your own witnessing life within
this principle. You have the requirement to be an eyewitness to the
gospel from your own life.

a. The gospel is never going to sound genuine if you do not have direct
experience with the source.

b. Your communication of the plan of God will not hit home without your
experience in its execution.

4. As a result, Christ does John a great favor here; He gives to him the
best possible chance of recovery through these acts.

5. Christ gives an indication that this is a grace ministry with the
phrase, “and to many blind He freely gave to see.” (Luke 7:21).

a. The verb ECHARISATO is in the aorist indicative. It summarizes a
simple past action.

b. It describes giving within the grace framework.

c. This verb extends over all the activities described herein. All of
these things were freely given.

6. The messengers are commanded by Christ to give proclamation to John.
This is not simply passing along a message; it is APAGGEILATE. This is a
command from Christ, to be carried out when these messengers arrive at
John’s prison cell. A proclamation is stronger than a message, and
concentrates with a stronger claim of integrity toward truth.

7. The final phrase is intriguing. “And blessed is anyone who does not
stumble over Me.”

a. The aorist passive subjunctive of SKANDALIZO does the following:

(1) It describes an action without reference to time. That is, the
action could occur at any time; it is open-ended.

(2) It describes potential action, performed by any human being alive at
the time of Christ.

(3) It describes action that acts on the subject ‘anyone’. It is more
literally ‘stumbled’ The idea is that someone is stumbled by something
outside of Christ - that there is no reason to stumble over Christ, but
because of the words of others there is a choice to stumble

b. People only chose to stumble over Christ because of what others were
saying, and this remains true today. This is the purpose of the
propaganda branch of the cosmic system.

c. The Propaganda Branch

(1) Introduction.

(a) The purpose of the propaganda branch is to promote the cosmic
counterfeits and lies, and to attack the word of God.

(b) The propaganda branch integrates and cooperates with both the
individual and the world branches of the cosmic system.

(c) The propaganda branch is an expression of Satanic genius and the
demonic organization.

(d) Human beings are an important element in the propaganda branch.

(2) The Promotion of the Cosmic Counterfeits and Lies.

(a) The cosmic system has an elaborate scheme of counterfeits and lies.

(b) These counterfeits and lies are designed to supplant the truth.

(c) The counterfeits and lies match up with every category of truth
possible.

· The Gospel.

· The plan of God.

· The power of God.

· The person and work of God.

· The person and work of Christ.

· The person and work of the Holy Spirit.

· And many more…

(d) These counterfeits and lies are promoted by every means possible.

· There is a great emphasis today on the media, and especially
television.

· Those who are heavily involved in the cosmic system inevitably become
cosmic propagandists.

(3) The Attack against the Word.

(a) In order to make the promotion of the cosmic counterfeits and lies
fully effective, the cosmic system attacks the Word.

(b) The attacks against the Word come in two basic categories.

· Attacks to destroy the Word outright. There have been many attempts
throughout history to destroy the manuscripts of the Bible.

· Attacks to undermine the credibility of the Word. These are usually
attacks on the supernatural nature of the Divine inspiration of the
Word. Liberal theologians are mainly responsible for this branch of the
attack on the Word.

d. There is blessing for everyone who is not stumbled.

(1) Category one is the salvation blessing, for all those who believe in
Jesus Christ.

(2) Category two is blessings in time from the advance to spiritual
maturity.

(3) Category three is blessings in the millennium for mature church age
believers only.

(4) Category four is blessings in the eternal state, for mature
believers of all dispensations.




Christ’s Teaching to the Crowd on the Baptist.

“And after the messengers of John left, He began to speak to the crowds
about John, ‘What did you go out into the desert to witness? A reed
stirred by the wind? Really, what did you go out to see? A man wearing
white clothes? Behold those in glorious clothing and possessing luxury
are in the palace.”

So now Christ has the opportunity to really set the record straight
about John the Baptist, and to let the world know that the great one has
failed. And he does not.

Christ’s response is to the crowd. Many of them had no doubt shaken
their heads in wonder at the demise of such a great man. For if this is
obvious to us, it would have been obvious to them.

And Christ wants to make very sure that the crowds do not enter into
judgment, knowing what they know about John.

(1) Because judgment is this:

(a) Judgment is the mental conclusion that someone is guilty before the
evidence and witnesses are gathered. This can occur in or out of the
courtroom, and applies even if you are an eyewitness to the act.

· Ultimately, the right to judge is reserved for our Lord Jesus Christ,
who will judge all church age believers at the judgement seat of Christ.

· Many times, people will judge because they fear they will not be
vindicated. When you have confidence in the justice of God, then this
fear will be removed.

· Jesus Christ will be perfectly fair at the judgment seat. No detail
will escape His attention.

· Jesus Christ is the only person who is perfectly qualified to judge
the human race.

- He died for those sins.

- He too lived a human life, and was tempted far beyond what we will
ever encounter.

· When we overstep the boundaries of our legitimate right to judge, then
we presume to take the place of Jesus Christ. James 4:12, “There is only
one Lawgiver and Judge, the one who is able to save and destroy. But
you–who are you to judge your neighbor?”

(b) Grudge judgement is the failure to forgive the perpetrator of a sin,
when that sin has been judged on the cross. This category of judgment
also comes into play when someone assumes that God cannot forgive a sin
or complex of sins.

(c) Lifestyle judgment is when one considers his lifestyle as superior
to another, when sin is not an issue.

(d) Gossip is the verbalization of any category of judgment to parties
that are not fundamental to the case. The intent is to damage the
reputation of one who may be guilty, but whose guilt has not been
established by proper evidentiary procedures. This applies to ANY sin.

And so Christ asks them a series of rhetorical questions.

(1) The base question is this: ‘What did you go out into the desert to
witness?’

(a) With the language of this question, Christ paints a graphic picture
of people rushing out to the wilderness to eyewitness something
spectacular.

(b) In other words, He says this: ‘For a bunch of people who are
scowling right now at John the Baptist, you sure were in a big hurry to
go see him during the prime of his ministry.

(c) The verb THEASASTHAI means to ‘behold’ or ‘witness’ something
spectacular or completely out of the ordinary.

(d) The fact that so many people left their everyday lives and went
clear out to the desert to see John shows how very earnest they were
about the whole deal.

(e) The desert was a journey of several days, and would have been the
equivalent of a drive of a thousand miles or even more.

(2) Christ then employs a facetious proposition with this question: ‘A
reed being shaken by the wind?’

(a) In the desert there are millions of these reeds - and the wind is
always blowing.

(b) So it’s kind of like: did you go out into the desert to witness
something completely commonplace? I don’t think so.

(c) But right now you are acting like John is completely commonplace.

(3) And a second proposition follows with a repetition of the base
question: ‘Really, what did you go out to witness?’

(a) The adversative conjunction ALLA works as a focusing element here,
placing the attention of the crowd on the second statement. It should be
translated ‘really.’

(b) And the facetious question is: ‘a man dressed in white?’

· Christ actually answers this one for the crowd. ‘Behold those in
glorious clothing and possessing luxury are in the palace.’

· Because there is no chance in the world that someone would find
someone dressed in such a fine way out in the wilderness. The notion is
utterly ridiculous. In fact, John was dressed in rough clothing, fit for
his life there, as they all would remember - Matthew 3:4.

(c) So Christ employs strong and biting rhetoric to point out that their
original motive for going to all that trouble to see John.

(4) Because they had gone out to see something really great, something
that had not been seen in Israel in hundreds of years.

“But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes I say to you, and more
than a prophet. He is the one about whom it has been written, ‘Behold I
send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before
you.’ Truly I say to you, among those born of women, no one is greater.”

In fact, the crowds went out to see a prophet. They went out to see the
first prophet in Israel in more than 450 years. The first prophet since
Malachi’s ministry around 435 BC

And not only this, but he was the greatest prophet of Israel, because he
was the one to introduce the Messiah personally to the world.

Christ quotes Malachi 3:1 for two reasons. First to make a connection
between the last two prophets of Israel; second to identify John’s
ministry clearly before this crowd.

And by doing this, Christ makes His own identity even more clear.

John had the most sacred duty of all the prophets of Israel, and it is
clear that he performed his duty in a most excellent manner.

Well, let’s see; among those prophets born of women - let’s see - that
would be ALL PROPHETS! John is the greatest.

John is the greatest prophet of his time, and really the greatest man of
his time.

He is not to be scowled at; and certainly not to be judged, for Christ
has rendered all the judgment that is going to happen before the
judgment seat occurs.

A comparison of John with those in the coming dispensation: “But the
least in the kingdom of God is greater than him. And from the days of
John the Baptist until now the kingdom of the heavens suffers violence
and violent men capture it. For all the prophets and the Law prophesied
until John; and if you want to listen, he himself is Elijah, the one who
is about to arrive.”

\*\*\* The dispensational change brings about changes in the angelic
conflict, in grace assets, and in rewards. That accounts for the
disparity between the dispensation of Israel past and the dispensation
of Israel future.

(1) The tribulation is a much tougher dispensation, because of the evil
ruling the earth unswayed by good.

(2) Therefore God compensates believers in that dispensation with
greater grace.

(3) And because of the difficulty of their mission, there is also
greater reward.

Christ transitions to His own dispensation now, so that the crowd might
know their own spiritual standing, and live up to it.

For maligning a great figure, even a fallen great figure, is not living
up to the standards of the kingdom.

(1) Matthew 5:21-24, “21 You heard that it was said to the ancients,
‘You will not commit murder’: and, ‘whoever murders, will be guilty
before the court.’ 22 But I say to you that everyone who is angry with
his brother will be guilty before the court; and whoever says to his
brother, ‘Raka’ will be guilty before the Sanhedrin; and whoever says,
‘Fool’ will be guilty unto the Gehenna of the Fire. 23 Therefore if you
are presenting your gift upon the altar and there remember that your
brother has something against you, 24 leave your gift there before the
altar and go first to be reconciled with your brother, and then after
coming back present your gift.”

(2) Christ set this standard during the Sermon on the Mount, and it is
the extension of the Law in His dispensation.

(3) The extension of the Law was because of the greatness of Christ’s
rule.

(4) Principle: Strictness should always be a measure of the people’s
true capacity to live up to the standard.

(5) Application: People in the millennium will have a fantastically high
standard of behavior, but this is only because through Christ’s direct
rule they will have the capacity to live up to it.

(6) Remember that this is a standard of purity that extends to the mouth
and the soul.

(7) In this dispensation we have standards that mainly apply to overt
action; the soul remains unregulated by the establishment.

(8) In the millennium, divine establishment will extend to matters of
the soul.

Principle: when anyone falls from the grace status of the plan of God,
when anyone does this in any dispensation, it is best to teach the
principle of doctrine related to the point of his fall.

(1) We have done a study on the fall of John the Baptist, and we have
seen in some detail why this man fell from grace. Scripture has done
this so that we might see the full picture.

(2) But Christ teaches the doctrine without applying it directly to John
the Baptist, displaying an absence of judgment in His procedure while
among men.

(3) Even Christ would refrain from judgment until His proper time at the
judgment seat. This was a part of His kenosis, the limiting of His
divine nature during the incarnation.

(4) So you teach or tell the point of doctrine related to the point of a
man’s fall without applying it to him directly.

(5) To illustrate this, examine closely what Christ has done with John.

(a) He is the greatest man of his dispensation.

(b) The least in Christ’s dispensation is greater than him.

(6) Now apply this to John’s downfall:

(a) The nature of Christ’s teaching would apply to anyone who acted like
John and wanted to cling to the dispensation of Israel.

(b) But it would only apply if it was true to John, and Christ refuses
to make that judgment.

(7) There are instances where establishment authority must have its say.

(a) Each establishment realm of authority must have its say if it is
proper.

(b) The criminal realm must have its say if a crime has been committed.

(c) The church realm must have its say if one of its leaders has
violated the provisions of 1 Timothy 3.

(d) In all other legitimate realms there may be reason for discipline.

(8) In all such cases, there must exist a proper system of
jurisprudence, based on biblical principles.

Then Christ summarizes the time of His ministry and even a little
before:

(1) That from the days of John the Baptist until the present time just
after the sermon on the mount the kingdom of heaven suffers violence and
violent men capture it.

(2) The verb BIAZETAI is the present passive indicative. It describes
the subject (the kingdom of heaven) as receiving the action, and it
means to receive or suffer violence.

(3) So this is Christ’s mid-term grading of the people of Israel. The
kingdom that He has offered is suffering violence.

(4) We need only remember John 5:17-18, “But He answered them,”My Father
is working until now, and I Myself am working." For this cause therefore
the Jews were seeking all the more to kill Him, because He not only was
breaking the Sabbath, but also was calling God His own Father, making
Himself equal with God."

(a) The two verbs translated “working” are both the same, ERGAZOMAI.
They are the present middle indicatives, indicating ongoing, non-stop
work to the indefinite future.

(b) The purpose of these verbs is to answer the assertion that we rest
because God rested. The essence of the Sabbath is not the cessation of
work, but concentration on God.

(c) But Christ’s works and God’s works should be the objects of
concentration, and they certainly are not a violation of the Moses’
Sabbath.

(d) Christ uses the personal pronoun EGO in order to emphasize His own
work - not in contrast to that of the Father’s, but in concert.

(e) So two things here would get the attention of the Pharisees:

· That Christ called God His Father.

· That Christ considered His work equivalent with that of the Father’s.

(f) As a result, the Jews were seeking all the more to kill him.

· The more bold Christ became, the more the Jews wanted to kill Him; the
more that Christ revealed about the plan of God in Him, the more the
Jews wanted to kill Him; the more that Christ set Himself up as a
substituted for them, the more the Jews wanted to kill Him.

· So this was not only persecution, but deadly persecution.

(g) Even two years before the death of Christ, the conspiracy to kill
Him gained great strength.

(h) Christ spoke the truth - He is a part of the trinity. God is three
persons in one Godhead.

· The first person of the Trinity is God the Father. The second person
of the Trinity is God the Son. The third person of the Trinity is God
the Holy Spirit.

· The three persons of the trinity possess identical essence in one
being.

· This divine being has three distinct persons which are autonomous from
one another in soul function.

· This distinction in persons is more than just one God showing
different facets or modes of His one person.

And violent men try to capture this kingdom.

(1) Now here is a worthy axiom: that every institution of God is under
assault from the enemy.

(2) That every good thing of God is constantly under attempt to capture
by those who wish to turn it for their own ends.

(3) BIASTAI is violent men; the plural noun form of BIAZO.

(4) And these violent men engage themselves in HARPAZOUSIN. This verb
means to seize or capture something by force. But it describes this
action as having a purpose. It is robbery or kidnapping, but never to
destroy the person or object taken!

(5) So there are those who are trying to take the kingdom of heaven by
force, to turn it to their own ends.

(6) There are therefore two categories of attacks against the kingdom of
heaven, and these tend to transfer to every dispensation.

(a) The attempt to destroy divine institutions by violence.

· Jewish dispensation illustration: Esther (see doctrine).

· Church dispensation illustration: the persecution of Nero (F.F.
Bruce).

· Modern illustration: reader’s digest “The War on Christians.”

(b) The attempt to capture divine institutions by force.

· Jewish dispensation illustration: the Pharisees (see doctrine).

· Church dispensation illustration: the Judaizers.

· Modern illustration: the downfall of Christian colleges and seminaries
- captured by means of money.

· Modern illustration \#2: the downfall of local churches. Compromised
by emphasis on numbers, or money.

(7) Each of these attacks depend upon the individual and propaganda
branches of the cosmic system. They interlock so as to cause a trapping
influence on individual lives.

(8) This attack also functions toward your own life through the
individual branch of the cosmic system.

Now comes what appears to be an enigma. “For all the prophets and the
Law prophesied until John; and if you want to listen, he himself is
Elijah, the one who is about to arrive.” Let’s gather the facts.

(1) The Greek adverb of time is EOS, which is translated ‘until.’ But
this until also indicates stoppage. That is, the action continued until
a certain point in time, and then ceased. This cumulative effect may
also emphasize a crescendo.

(2) The act of prophesying is simply the communication of truth about a
subject. Here the unstated subject is Jesus Christ. The act of
prediction is in view, so that the prophets and the Law prophesied about
Christ until John.

(a) So that Christ indicates a culmination for the Law and the Prophets
with John’s ministry.

(b) This also properly includes the ministry of John as a part of that
dispensation.

(3) The aorist verb from PROPHETEUO summarizes the many past actions of
the law and the prophets into one moment of time. And it concentrates on
the culmination that action in John the Baptist.

(4) EI THELETE DEXASTHAI is an idiom. Literally it is: ‘if you want to
receive.’ But receive is not a good English word for the phenomenon -
listen is much better according to our idiom.

(5) So Christ says that we all have a choice to listen and receive the
truth of what He is about to say. He is warning us with this idiom that
what He is going to say may be hard to accept.

(6) It is hard to accept because it means the end of their times as they
know it.

(7) Recall the parables of the dispensational change: (see the doctrine
of wineskins)

(8) Christ makes Elijah a metaphor or type for John; there is a direct
comparison between the two.

(9) And an explanation is attached: HO MELLON ERCHESTHAI. This
translates literally, ‘the one who is about to arrive.’

(a) Matthew 17:9-13 (also Mark 9:9-13), “(9) As they were coming down
from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying, ‘Tell the vision to no
one until the son of Man has risen from the dead.’ (10) And his
disciples asked Him, ‘Why then do the scribes say that Elijah must come
first?’ (11) And He answered and said, ‘Elijah is coming and will
restore all things; (12) but I say to you that Elijah already came, and
they did not recognize him, but did to him whatever they wished. So also
the Son of Man is going to suffer at their hands.’ (13) Then the
disciples understood that He had spoken to them about John the Baptist.”

· The three disciples of the inner circle, Peter, James, and John, have
just witnessed the transfiguration of Christ and seen Moses and Elijah
in their interim state.

· There are two appearances of Elijah that come to bear on this
incident.

- The first is the coming of John the Baptist, a type of Elijah.

- The second is the coming of Moses and Elijah in the tribulation, a
precursor to the second advent, as revealed in Revelation 11:1-12.

· When Christ says Elijah is coming and will restore all things, it
refers to the tribulational appearance of Elijah in his interim body.

· Christ then compares His future sufferings with the past sufferings of
John the Baptist; they are both persecutions.

(b) John the Baptist was the one who was ‘about to arrive’ for a long
time. In fact for more than 450 years he held this status. Malachi 4:5
was a favorite verse of the scholarly class of Israel: “Behold I am
going to send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and
terrible day of the Lord.”

· The day of the Lord entails all of eschatology, and from the Old
Testament point of view, both advents.

· The scholars loved to talk about the one who would prepare the way for
the Messiah, because his arrival would mark the beginning of the end.

· This is not unlike the fascination today with the rapture, and even
the tendency to place certain prophecies within the church age when they
are not.

(10) John evoked a memory of Elijah by his clothes, his asceticism, his
ministry in the wilderness, and his bold rebuke of the powerful.

(a) There is no true reincarnation of Elijah’s soul in John the
Baptist’s body; rather, the one man is a type of the other.

(b) In the tribulation, there is a resurrection of Elijah to prepare the
way for the second coming. But neither is this a reincarnation.

John is the dividing element for volition in Israel. “And after all the
people and tax-gatherers heard they declared God as righteous, having
been baptized by John; But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the
will of God for themselves, not being baptized by him.”

A general rule is now given: those who were positive to John responded
positively to what Christ had taught; those who were negative to John’s
ministry also rejected Christ’s teaching.

Of course it is the usual suspects here, the Pharisees.

Being baptized by John is the place of division because it was the
command of the day.

A simple principle comes to mind: if you are positive to Bible teaching,
it will not matter at all who is teaching it. It could be John or
Christ; it could be anyone with any personality.

This is because the truth always wins through the personality of its
teacher.

And this is also a matter of irony, that the teaching of Christ has to
do with the downfall of John. This is why the dividing line is
mentioned.

So the condition goes like this: if you liked the ministry of John, then
you will have an appreciation for what Christ has said on the downfall
of John. Why? Because they are both the truth.

Christ concludes with an assessment of the response of Israel to His
ministry and John’s. ‘Therefore to whom will I compare the men of this
generation and to whom are they like? They are like children who are
sitting in the market-place and calling out to one another who say, ‘We
played the flute for you and you did not dance, we sang a dirge and you
did not weep.’

So imagine children playing instruments in a marketplace; really poor
music coming from them in flute and voice.

There is no funeral there, nor any celebration, so the demands of the
children are inappropriate.

The music is bad and the occasion inappropriate. And then they become
indignant over the situation because there is no response from the
crowd.

He goes on to explain His illustration: For John the Baptist came not
eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon.’ The Son
of Man came eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Behold a gluttonous man
and a drunkard, a friend of tax-gatherers and sinners. And wisdom is
justified by all her children.’”

(1) This points out the utter hypocrisy of those who were negative to
the truth.

(2) And a principle: that hypocrites are negative to any form of
behavior on the part of those who have true freedom.

(3) Obedience to the law of God creates individual liberty. People who
are negative to the law of God are haters of freedom.

(4) So when John the Baptist lived an ascetic life in the wilderness,
the hypocrites slandered him, saying that he had a demon.

(5) And when Christ does just the opposite, eating and drinking
(alcohol), criticism comes His way. The slanderers go to work, and call
him a glutton, drunk, and friend of evil men.

(6) The final statement is about the fruit of wisdom. Wisdom is
justified by what it produces. The opposite is also true: folly is
condemned by all her children.

(a) A man is condemned by his children, if they are wrong.

(b) 1 Timothy 3:4-5, “(4) He must be one who manages his own household
well, keeping his children under control with all dignity (5) (but if a
man does not know how to manage his own household, how ill he take care
of the church of God?)”

(c) And Christ is saying here that if you wonder about those who are
negative to doctrine, then simply examine their fruit.

(d) Is irrational hypocrisy the fruit of wisdom?

The Woes Upon Chorazin and Bethsaida
------------------------------------

The Woes upon Chorazin and Bethsaida

Matthew 11:20-24:

(20) Then He began to denounce the cities in which the most of His
miracles appeared, because they did not repent: (21) ‘Woe to you,
Chorazin, woe to you, Bethsaida; because if in Tyre and Sidon the
miracles which occurred appeared among you, they would have long ago
repented in sackcloth and ashes. (22) Therefore I say to you, it will be
more tolerable for Tyre and for Sidon in the day of judgment than for
you. (23) And you Capernaum, You will you be lifted as far as heaven,
will you? You will fall down as far as Hades… because if in Sodom there
appeared the miracles which appeared in you, it would have remained
until this day. (24) Therefore I say to you that it will be more
tolerable for the ground of Sodom in the day of judgment than for you.”

Introduction.

In this passage we will examine the doctrines of corporate
responsibility and final judgment.

Furthermore we will study Old Testament history, to briefly examine the
negative examples of Tyre, Sidon, and Sodom.

II. City histories - modern.

Chorazin.

This is the only New Testament reference to this city; there are no Old
Testament references at all.

It lies a couple of miles from Capernaum, and was important enough for a
special Roman road connecting it to the main caravan route to Damascus.

Bethsaida.

This town (the ‘House of Fishing’) was founded by Philip the Tetrarch of
Herod’s family in honor of Julia, the daughter of Julius Caesar. Philip
made it his capital.

It is named as the hometown of Philip, Andrew, and Peter, the disciples
of our Lord. It may also be the hometown of James and John.

In Mark 8:22-26 Christ does still another miracle there, healing a blind
man by spitting on his eyes and laying His hands on him.

It is across the Jordan from the other cities mentioned by Christ in our
passage.

Capernaum.

This was the headquarters of Jesus for the major part of His Galilean
ministry, Matthew 4:13, “and leaving Nazareth, He came and settled in
Capernaum, which is by the sea, in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali.”
Christ even calls Capernaum His own city in Matthew 9:1.

Matthew worked in a tax office there, and Peter and Andrew had moved
there from Bethsaida.

Many miracles are listed as having occurred here:

The exorcism of the demonaic in the synagogue, Mark 1:21-28.

The healing of Peter’s mother-in-law, Mark 1:29-31.

The healing of the paralytic who was let down through the roof, Mark
2:1-12.

The healing of the official’s child, John 4:46-54.

The healing of the centurion’s servant, Matthew 8:5-13.

III. City histories - ancient. “Famous destructions for a thousand,
Alex.”

Tyre.

Tyre is a very ancient city on the seacoast of the Mediterranean,
northwest of Jerusalem. It is mentioned in ancient Egyptian texts as far
back as the 19th century, BC

During the reign of Hiram I, Tyre became the friend of Israel, and aided
greatly in the building of Solomon’s temple. 1 Kings 7:13-50.

But the people of Tyre were often a target of prophecy, and that means
degeneracy and idolatry.

Ezekiel 26-28 and Zechariah 9 are the two main passages of prophetic
judgment against Tyre.

Ezekiel 26:14 is a highlight: “‘I will make you a bare rock; you will be
a place for the spreading of nets. You will be built no more, for I the
Lord have spoken,’ declares the Lord”

Ezekiel 28:11-19 contains the restatement of the prehistoric dirge over
Satan as it applies to the king of Tyre.

Zechariah 9:3-4 says this: “(3) For Tyre built herself a fortress and
piled up silver like dust, and gold like the mire of the streets. (4)
Behold, the Lord will dispossess her and cast her wealth into the sea;
and she will be consumed with fire.”

In the middle of the fourth century, BC, Tyre was destroyed by siege,
and nothing was left. It was one of the more spectacular destructions in
history.

Sidon.

Sidon is not too fare from Tyre, about 25 miles to the north. Its
history is closely associated with its sister city. Often they are
mentioned in one breath ‘Tyre and Sidon.’ But do not be fooled: these
two cities often battled.

Sidon is first mentioned in about the 15th or 14th century BC They were
first under Egyptian dominance, and then after 1200 BC, Phoenician sway
came to bear over them.

With the rise of Israel under king David around 1000 BC, the Phoenician
or Philistine power base was broken, so that Sidon established autonomy
as a kingdom.

In the mid-eighth century, Sidon had fallen to the kingdom of Tyre under
Hiram the second.

When the northern kingdom of Israel fell in 722 and thereafter, Sidon
came under the Assyrian empire. With the rise of the Babylonians, Sidon
then went that way.

During the Persian revolt of Straton in 351, Sidon was destroyed
completely. It was another spectacular destruction of the ancient world.

Isaiah 23 contains a prophecy against both Tyre and Sidon. It predicts
their destruction.

Sodom.

There is a big hole where Sodom used to be. It is now the Dead Sea, and
the lowest place on earth.

Enough said.

IV. The doctrine of corporate responsibility.

In this passage, Christ concentrates His final judgment on three cities.
The punishment is corporate.

Corporate responsibility is certainly a part of Bible Doctrine. We need
to examine two major points: the fact of corporate responsibility, and
the mixture of individual justice with corporate justice.

The fact of corporate responsibility.

The five cycles of discipline, Leviticus 26:14-39.

The First Cycle, verses 14-17, “’(14) But if you will not listen to me
and carry out all these commands, {15} and if you reject my decrees and
abhor my laws and fail to carry out all my commands and so violate my
covenant, {16} then I will do this to you: I will bring upon you sudden
terror in the form of wasting diseases and fever that will destroy your
sight and drain away your life. You will plant seed in vain, because
your enemies will eat it. {17} I will set my face against you so that
you will be defeated by your enemies; those who hate you will rule over
you, and you will flee even when no one is pursuing you.”

The Second Cycle, verses 18-20. “{18} ’If after all this you will not
listen to me, I will punish you for your sins seven times over. {19} I
will break down your stubborn pride and make the sky above you like iron
and the ground beneath you like bronze. {20} Your strength will be spent
in vain, because your soil will not yield its crops, nor will the trees
of the land yield their fruit.”

The Third Cycle, verses 21-22. “{21} ’If you remain hostile toward me
and refuse to listen to me, I will multiply your afflictions seven times
over, as your sins deserve. {22} I will send wild animals against you,
and they will rob you of your children, destroy your cattle and make you
so few in number that your roads will be deserted.”

The Fourth Cycle, verses 23-26. “{23} ’If in spite of these things you
do not accept my correction but continue to be hostile toward me, {24} I
myself will be hostile toward you and will afflict you for your sins
seven times over. {25} And I will bring the sword upon you to avenge the
breaking of the covenant. When you withdraw into your cities, I will
send a plague among you, and you will be given into enemy hands. {26}
When I cut off your supply of bread, ten women will be able to bake your
bread in one oven, and they will dole out the bread by weight. You will
eat, but you will not be satisfied.”

The Fifth Cycle, verses 27-39. “{27} ’If in spite of this you still do
not listen to me but continue to be hostile toward me, {28} then in my
anger I will be hostile toward you, and I myself will punish you for
your sins seven times over. {29} You will eat the flesh of your sons and
the flesh of your daughters. {30} I will destroy your high places, cut
down your incense altars and pile your dead bodies on the lifeless forms
of your idols, and I will abhor you. {31} I will turn your cities into
ruins and lay waste your sanctuaries, and I will take no delight in the
pleasing aroma of your offerings. {32} I will lay waste the land, so
that your enemies who live there will be appalled. {33} I will scatter
you among the nations and will draw out my sword and pursue you. Your
land will be laid waste, and your cities will lie in ruins. {34} Then
the land will enjoy its Sabbath years all the time that it lies desolate
and you are in the country of your enemies; then the land will rest and
enjoy its Sabbaths. {35} All the time that it lies desolate, the land
will have the rest it did not have during the Sabbaths you lived in it.
{36}”‘As for those of you who are left, I will make their hearts so
fearful in the lands of their enemies that the sound of a windblown leaf
will put them to flight. They will run as though fleeing from the sword,
and they will fall, even though no one is pursuing them. {37} They will
stumble over one another as though fleeing from the sword, even though
no one is pursuing them. So you will not be able to stand before your
enemies. {38} You will perish among the nations; the land of your
enemies will devour you. {39} Those of you who are left will waste away
in the lands of their enemies because of their sins; also because of
their fathers’ sins they will waste away.”

These cycles bring corporate punishment onto the nation of Israel for
her rejection of God’s code of divine establishment. The discipline is
upon the nation as a whole.

Principle: participation in any evil organization means that you will
share the discipline of it, when God comes to act.

This discipline is designed to motivate the individuals of the
organization to reform themselves before Him.

Reformation of any organization comes from the reformation of individual
souls.

Those spiritually sound persons who are left in a degenerate
organization must function as ambassadors to those who are not.

At the same time, they must consider whether the function of evil is
tolerable.

The destruction of Sodom, Genesis 18:16-33, “(16) Then the men rose up
from there, and looked down toward Sodom; and Abraham was walking with
them to send them off. (17) The Lord said, ‘Shall I hide from Abraham
what I am about to do, (18) since Abraham will surely become a great and
mighty nation, and in him all the nations of the earth will be blessed?
(19) For I have chosen him, so that he may command his children and his
household after him to keep the way of the Lord by doing righteousness
and justice, so that the Lord may bring upon Abraham what He has spoken
about him.’ (20) And the Lord said, ‘The outcry of Sodom and Gomorrah is
indeed great, and their sin is exceedingly grave. (21) I will go down
now, and see if they have done entirely according to its outcry, which
has come to Me; and if not, I will know.’ (22) Then the men turned away
from there and went toward Sodom, while Abraham was still standing
before the Lord. (23) Abraham came near and said, ‘Will You indeed sweep
away the righteous with the wicked? (24) Suppose there are fifty
righteous within the city; will You indeed sweep it away and not spare
the place for the sake of the fifty righteous who are in it? (25) Far be
it from You to do such a thing, to slay the righteous with the wicked,
so that the righteous and the wicked are treated alike. Far be it from
You! Shall not the Judge of all the earth deal justly?’ (26) So the Lord
said, ‘If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will
spare the whole place on their account.’ (27) And Abraham replied, ‘Now
behold, I have ventured to speak to the Lord, although I am but dust and
ashes. (28) Suppose the fifty righteous are lacking five, will You
destroy the whole city because of five?’ And He said, ‘I will not
destroy it if I find forty-five there.’ (29) He spoke to Him yet again
and said, ‘Suppose forty are found there?’ And He said, ‘I will not do
it on account of the forty.’ (30) Then he said, ‘Oh may the Lord not be
angry, and I shall speak; suppose thirty are found there?’ And He said,
‘I will not destroy it on account of the twenty.’ (31) And he said, ‘Now
behold, I have ventured to speak to the Lord; suppose twenty are found
there?’ And he said, ‘I will not destroy it on account of the twenty.’
(32) Then he said, ‘Oh may the Lord not be angry, and I shall speak only
this once; suppose ten are found there?’ And He said, ‘I will not
destroy it on account of the ten.’ (33) As soon as He had finished
speaking to Abraham the Lord departed, and Abraham returned to his
place.”

Abraham’s real concern is for Lot and his family, and God sees to it
that they escape, as is explained in the next chapter.

So every innocent person is taken care of by the justice of God, even in
the cases of corporate punishment.

But Lot and his family still suffered; they lost their possessions and
their homes, although they had their lives preserved (except his
unfaithful wife).

One note: it may be your time to die. If it is, then you may share in
the corporate punishment of a nation or city even though you are
righteous. Generally, you will have to escape.

The destruction of enemy cities.

Deuteronomy 20:10-20: “(10) When you approach a city to fight against
it, you shall offer it terms of peace. (11) If it agrees to make peace
with you and opens to you, then all the people who are found in it shall
become your forced labor and shall serve you. (12) However, if it does
not make peace with you, but makes war against you, then you shall
besiege it. (13) When the Lord your God gives it into your hand, you
shall strike all the men in it with the edge of the sword. (14) Only the
women and the children and the animals and all that is in the city, all
its spoil, you shall take as booty for yourself; and you shall use the
spoil of your enemies which the Lord your God has given you. (15) Thus
you shall do to all the cities that are very far from you, which are not
of the cities of these nations nearby.”

This provision of the Law makes it clear that there is corporate
responsibility for the enemies of God.

Furthermore, you can see that the men of the organization bear the full
responsibility of the sword.

Additionally, God is a merciful God. It is a given that the city will
fall; that He gives the men a chance to live according to their choice
is clear evidence of His mercy.

The men of the city have a chance to take God at His word. If they do
not, then it is clear that they hate God, and they will die.

The destruction of idolatrous cities.

Deuteronomy 13:12-16: “(12) If you hear in one of your cities, which the
Lord you God is giving you to live in, anyone saying that (13) some
worthless men have gone out from among you and have seduced the
inhabitants of their city, saying, ‘Let us go and serve other gods’
(whom you have not known), (14) then you shall investigate and search
out and inquire thoroughly. If it is true and the matter established
that this abomination has been done among you, (15) you shall surely
strike the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, utterly
destroying it and all that is in it and its cattle with the edge of the
sword. (16) Then you shall gather all its booty into the middle of its
open square and burn the city and all its booty with fire as a whole
burnt offering to the Lord your God; and it shall be a ruin forever. It
shall never be rebuilt.”

This has to do with idolatry among the people.

All the inhabitants of the city are destroyed after proper
jurisprudence. All of the spoil of its conquest is killed and then
burned as an offering to God.

Principle: idolaters become a burnt offering to God; their folly
demonstrates God’s justice and righteousness as beneficial to mankind.

Corporate responsibility in the New Testament.

As a part of the Establishment Code of the Mosaic Law.

Toward churches, Revelation 2-3.

(1) In these chapters, Christ sends messages through John to each of the
seven churches of Asia.

(a) Revelation 2:4-5 (to Ephesus), “(4) But I have this against you,
that you have left your first love. (5) Therefore remember from where
you have fallen, and repent and do the deeds you did at first; or else I
am coming to you and will remove your lampstand out of it place - unless
you repent.”

(b) Revelation 2:14-16 (to Pergamum), “(14) But I have a few things
against you, because you have there some who hold the teaching of
Balaam, who kept teaching Balak to put a stumbling block before the sons
of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols and to commit acts of
immorality. (15) So you also have some who in the same way hold the
teaching of the Nicolaitans (Gnostic licentiousness). (16) Therefore
repent; or else I am coming to you quickly, and I will make war against
them with the sword of My mouth.”

(c) Revelation 2:20-24 (to Thyatira), “(20) But I have this against you,
that you tolerate the woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess, and
she teaches and leads My bond-servants astray so that they commit acts
of immorality and eat things sacrificed to idols. (21) I gave her time
to repent, and she does not want to repent of her immorality. (22)
Behold, I will throw her on a bed of sickness, and those who commit
adultery with her into great tribulation, unless they repent of her
deeds. (23) And I will kill her children with pestilence, and all the
churches will know that I am He who searches the minds and hearts; and I
will give to each one of you according to your deeds. (24) But I say to
you, the rest who are in Thyatira, who do not hold this teaching, who
have not known the deep things of Satan, as they call them - I place no
other burden on you.”

· The sin with Jezebel was not institutionalized within the church
there.

· Rather, many members of this local body went out to visit her and
more.

· So there is discipline only against those who go out, and not against
the church itself.

(d) Revelation 3:1-3 (to Sardis), “(1) To the angel of the church in
Sardis write: He who has the seven Spirits of God and the seven stars,
says this: ‘I know your deeds, that you have a name that you are alive,
but you are dead. (2) Wake up, and strengthen the things that remain,
which were about to die; for I have not found your deeds completed in
the sight of My God. (3) So remember what you have received and heard;
and keep it, and repent. Therefore if you do not wake up, I will come
like a thief, and you will not know at what hour I will come to you.”

(e) Revelation 3:15-19 (to Laodicea), “(15) I know your deeds, that you
are neither cold nor hot; I wish that you were cold or hot. (16) So
because you are lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I will spit you out
of My mouth. (17) Because you say, ‘I am rich, and have become wealthy,
and have need of nothing,’ and you do not know that you are wretched and
miserable and poor and blind and naked, (18) I advise you to buy from Me
gold refined by fire so that you may become rich, and white garments so
that you may clothe yourself, and that the shame of your nakedness will
not be revealed; and eye salve to anoint your eyes so that you may see.
(19) Those whom I love, I reprove and discipline; therefore be zealous
and repent.’”

So there is corporate responsibility in churches and nations during the
church age. In fact, we can safely extend the principle to every
organization.

Principles of Corporate Responsibility.

A corporation is here defined as any organization on earth, from the
marriage to the nation.

Individual responsibility supersedes corporate responsibility.

Individual justice supersedes corporate justice.

If members of the corporation participate in evil outside of corporate
function, there is no corporate responsibility.

If the corporation functions under the principle of sin, human good, or
evil, then all members of the corporation are culpable unto God.

There are degrees of sin: minor graft and murder are distinguished by
the Bible, and these kinds of distinctions should be considered in the
corporate realm.

The Biblical method of capital punishment is stoning; it has a strong
corporate emphasis, because the individual members of the corporation
(family and neighborhood) must participate in the punishment. Stoning
points out that criminality has strong influence from the family and
neighborhood.

Under corporate responsibility, there are three individual
responsibilities:

To grow spiritually and have maximum invisible impact.

To have personal integrity. That is, to conduct yourself within the
corporation under the principles of divine character.

To refuse to participate in corporate-sponsored sin.

Crusader arrogance destroys any true positive impact that a believer
might have.

Crusader arrogance attempts to destroy the authority systems of a
corporation.

Crusader arrogance destroys evil and good together in one fell swoop -
the nature of the term derives from the crusades, when armies descended
on the Holy Land in order to free it from the Egyptians and Moslems.
Many good men died and after nearly 200 years of warfare nothing at all
was accomplished. Most Europeans were embittered about the whole
experience.

(1) During the Middle Ages, especially around 1000 AD, it became the
practice of many Christians and religious types to make pilgrimages to
the Holy Land.

(2) Many of these pilgrims were self-righteous and terribly arrogant,
and they treated the occupants of Palestine with disdain.

(3) As a result of the conflicts between Christians and Moslems over the
pilgrimages, access to the Holy places was limited and even stopped
altogether.

(4) This led to an outrage in Europe, and the Pope Urban II made an
impassioned appeal at Clermont, in which he made the case for the
military capture of Palestine. He summarized his appeal with the words
“God wills it!” and this became the rallying cry of the First Crusade.

(5) The First Crusade is noted for its disorganized waves of armies.

(a) First the lesser lords and commoners went in four groups, each
failing spectacularly in turn. The fourth of these turned anti-Semitic
and began their crusade by marching through the Rhineland and attacking
enclaves of Jews wherever they went. All of these groups suffered from a
lack of discipline and leadership, and they inevitably lost their
cohesion through desertion and disillusionment.

(b) The greater lords of Europe set out in 1096. Representing many
nations and languages, this grand alliance was not much more than a
disorganized collection of small regiments of men. After many adventures
that seemed to always include internal squabbles, these armies marched
through Asia Minor and besieged Antioch, taking it after a great
struggle. They went on to Jerusalem, and captured it on July 15, 1099.
There was a big argument then on who was to rule the newly captured
land.

(c) After this, the outposts in the Holy Land were strengthened, and the
crusaders generally took everything that was not nailed down. Many laid
claim to parcels of the conquered land, and some became wealthy.

(6) The Second Crusade is noted for what was lost.

(a) While the crusaders left in the Holy Land were trying to consolidate
their gains, an enemy came from the west, in Egypt. His name was
Saladin.

(b) Saladin attacked with ferocity and quickness. He recaptured
Jerusalem in October of 1187. The crusaders were driven back to just a
few outposts along the Mediterranean coast.

(7) The Third Crusade was an attempt to take back what had fallen.

(a) The Holy Roman Emperor, Frederick I, “Barbarossa,” Philip II of
France, and Richard the Lion-hearted of England all headed up their
respective armies of state.

(b) Although Richard dominated the military scene, and was justly noted
for his courage in battle, he was also ruthless, and massacred prisoners
of war.

(c) Richard defeated Saladin in September of 1191, and although they had
made no great territorial gains, Saladin at least agreed to allow
Christians access to Jerusalem.

(8) The Fourth Crusade attacked and sacked Constantinople out of rage
and greed. It simply caused a great division between Christians east and
west, and never reached the Holy Land.

(9) In the next century, there were two movements of children, which
were sheer folly and disasters.

(a) “In France a shepherd boy, Etienne, from Cloyes, near Vendome,
announced that he was directed in a vision to lead an expedition to
crush the Saracens. He and the followers he attracted preached across
France, and thousands of children joined him and gathered at Marseilles.
They expected the sea to open before them, but when it failed they
embarked in seven vessels. Two of these were wrecked off Sardinia, and
the other five were captured, evidently by pre-arrangement, and the
children taken to the slave markets of Alexandria and Baghdad.” - the
American Peoples’ Encyclopedia, vol.6, p.577.

(b) A second expedition of children got to the sea in Italy, and when it
did not open for them, the Pope urged them to go home, and they did.

(10) There were other minor crusades and diplomacies, but all failed to
accomplish the initial aim.

(11) And listen: what Biblical mandate was ever in place that people had
a necessity toward pilgrimage? How is a pilgrimage, a work, ever a
spiritual necessity? It was emotion, and nothing more that drove the
crusades. Any believer with truth in his soul could see this and avoid
it.

(12) And once a crusade is begun, there is sacrifice involved, and pride
goes with that sacrifice, so that it is difficult indeed to retreat.

(13) The American People’s Encyclopedia concludes: “The effects of the
crusades seem largely negative. At the conclusion of the movement the
Holy Land was more thoroughly in Moslem control than at the beginning.
The Byzantine empire, the bulwark of Christendom, was irreparably
weakened… The treachery and cruelty which marked much of their history,
and the apparent futility of the effort, are in marked contrast to the
faith, courage, and devotion which were sometimes the reality, and
always the ideal, of the crusade.”

Crusader arrogance sets up a false premise and takes extreme action to
fulfill that premise. The extreme action normally stems from an
apparently pure motive.

Usually the false premise includes improvement of the devil’s world.

The crusade has a ‘no turning back’ mentality.

The crusade does not care about ethics related to means. They will
achieve their false goals on the basis of corrupt means, even
implementing evil.

Crusades not only always fail, but they also always make the situation
worse in their failure.

10. The challenge that every Christian has in the devil’s world is this:
how to change the people, and even the organizations, without destroy
yourself and the organizations. This is accomplished as follows:

Priorities. That is, spiritual growth and relationship with God must be
the number one priority in the life of every Christian.

Duty. That is, a sense of duty about ambassadorship. Changing
organizations is always about changing lives.

Humility and Authority Orientation. True humility is a predisposition to
obey legitimate authority; authority orientation is the understanding of
authority as a divine institution, and its role in preserving freedom.

Esprit de Corps.

(1) Esprit de corps has many characteristics.

(a) Confidence based on the system, and not on personal attributes.

(b) Putting the system above self in impersonal love.

(c) A sense of destiny based on the system, not on self.

(d) Fellowship with others based on the system, not on personal
attributes

(e) Perpetuation of high personal standards totally apart from what the
world has to offer in the form of peer pressure, status quo, media
pressure, current trends, and popularity.

(f) Esteem based on the system rather than on self.

(g) Perpetuation of traditions and lore.

(2) Esprit de corps in the Christian life is based on the person and
work of Jesus Christ.

(3) Esprit de corps in the Christian life is accelerated by the
consistent filling of the Spirit plus the consistent intake,
metabolization, and processing of bible doctrine under a pastor teacher.

(4) Esprit de corps is applied in several ways:

(a) Impersonal love.

(b) A personal sense of destiny.

(c) Spiritual self esteem.

(d) Fellowship with other Christians.

(e) Perpetuation of the standards of the Christian life in spite of what
the opinion of the world might have to say.

(5) Esprit de corps in the Christian life has as its prototype the
person of Jesus Christ.

(6) Esprit de corps is an important part of many of the problem solving
devices for church age believers.

(7) Illustrations of Esprit de Corps.

(a) After the 1982 Beirut Bombing, Marine Corps Commandant P. X. Kelly
visited a wounded Marine in the hospital to present his Purple Heart.
Covered by tubes and unable to speak, the Marine simply asked for pad
and pen. On it he wrote: “Semper Fi.”

(b) Marine Corps Lore: Chesty Puller, when shown a flame-thrower the
first time, asked, “Where do you put the bayonet?”

(c) The Marine Corps OCS system. The Marine Corps officer program is
primarily run by enlisted men; in order to receive a commission as a
Marine Corps Officer, you have to get by the enlisted cadre. If you meet
their standards, then they figure you are qualified to lead them into
battle.

(d) You are a Marine first. As a Christian, you are a Christian first.

Distinctions in he doctrine of final judgment.

Hebrews 9:27-28, “(27) And inasmuch as it is appointed for men to die
once and after this comes judgment, (28) so Christ also, having been
offered once to bear the sins of many, will appear a second time for
salvation without reference to sin, to those who eagerly await Him.”

You only die once; you only get one chance in this world, and then comes
judgment.

The lesson of verse 28 is that Christ appears twice for salvation; the
first advent is the cross, while the second is the rescue of the remnant
of Israel at the end of the tribulation.

You get one shot at this life; this is your life!

A Panorama of Judgment.

The judgment of Adam’s Original Sin.

Judgement of our sins on the cross.

The self-judgment of our sins in time through confession.

The Judgment Seat of Christ, the evaluation of all Church Age believers.

The baptism of fire, which is the judgment of all unbelievers of the
tribulation, both Jew and Gentile, Mt 25:31-46; Ezek 20:33-48.

The evaluation of all tribulational believers, both Jew and Gentile, Mt
25:31-46; Dan 12:2-3.

At the great white throne, there are three categories of judgments.

The judgment of believers.

(1) All believers who lived before the incarnation, both Jew and
Gentile, are judged at this time.

(2) All Millennial believers are judged at this time.

The judgment of unbelievers. All unbelievers in history, except those of
the tribulation, are judged at this time. Mt 25:3146, Ezek 20:3238, Rev
20:7-10.

The judgment of all fallen angels at the end of the Millennium. Their
sentence was passed before time began, but its execution is not carried
out until the end of human history.

Corporate Judgment.

The judgment of human beings for their participation in evil corporate
activity must be woven into the individual judgments.

So when Christ says, “…it will be more tolerable for Tyre and for Sidon
in the day of judgment than for you.” He means that the individuals of
those cities will receive harsh judgment for living there without
concern.

But Christ does not mean that the historical populations of those cities
are gathered and judged together for their sins.

Remember, individual responsibility supersedes corporate responsibility.

VI. A Brief Exposition. “(20) Then He began to denounce the cities in
which the most of His miracles appeared, because they did not repent:
(21) ‘Woe to you, Chorazin, woe to you, Bethsaida; because if in Tyre
and Sidon the miracles which occurred appeared among you, they would
have long ago repented in sackcloth and ashes. (22) Therefore I say to
you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and for Sidon in the day of
judgment than for you. (23) And you Capernaum, You will you be lifted as
far as heaven, will you? You will fall down as far as Hades… because if
in Sodom there appeared the miracles which appeared in you, it would
have remained until this day. (24) Therefore I say to you that it will
be more tolerable for the ground of Sodom in the day of judgment than
for you.”

The first woe is pronounced against Chorazin and Bethsaida; He compares
them to the ancient and evil cities of Tyre and Sidon, and mentions that
they would have repented in sackcloth and ashes had they seen the same
miracles.

Sackcloth was a kind of garment made of camel or goat’s hair. It was a
rough garment, and it signified mourning, protest, or repentance. The
discomfort and non-social look of the sackcloth indicated that the
wearer had turned inward to reflect upon God.

Ashes were smeared on the head or forehead to portray a simple
principle: “Ashes to Ashes.” They were a reminder that only the soul
returns to God.

See the doctrine of Repentance.

A question has been asked: if they would have repented, then why didn’t
God send miracles to them? Doesn’t this breach 2 Peter 3:9, “God is not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance.”?

In eternity past, through divine foreknowledge God knew exactly what it
would take for each person to repent and be saved.

In the divine decree, God set the minimum standard that gospel
information would be provided to all who desired it, that is, at least
to all who are positive at God-consciousness.

This is the satisfaction of the justice of God.

However, God could not be fair in the angelic conflict and sweep
everyone off their feet, overwhelming them with spectacular miracles and
arguments.

So there is a minimum standard of truth that everyone will receive; but
it is not possible that all receive the maximum.

In summary, God is not willing that any should perish, but He is
restricted by His own sense of honor so that He will not overwhelm
anyone.

The people of Tyre and Sidon had all that they needed to repent; even if
they did not have the maximum, they had enough.

Verse 22 makes it clear that there are degrees of judgment in eternity.

The comparative adjective ANEKTOTERON shows those degrees.

(1) It comes from ANEKTOS, which is ‘endurable, tolerable.’

(2) This adjective is made into the comparative form with the suffix
-TER.

(3) So Christ clearly communicates that even in negative judgment there
are degrees.

And you would believe it to be so, since God is indeed a just God, and
in negative judgment there should be degrees of bad and degrees of
punishment.

This is the gist of Revelation 20:12, “And I saw the dead, the great and
the small, standing before the throne, and books were opened; and
another book was opened, which is the book of life; and the dead were
judged from the things which were written in the books, according to
their deeds.”

(1) The spiritually dead are judged according to their works. They
cannot be judged according to their sins, because those sins were paid
for at the cross.

(2) So the works of unbelievers become their condemnation, because those
works were offered as a substitute for the work of Christ. For this
reason, they are blasphemy before God. All works substitute the gospel.

(3) Naturally, some unbelievers are more prolific at their substitution
efforts than others.

(4) Therefore, the fact that the people of Bethsaida and Chorazin
rejected such a compelling presentation of the gospel indicates that
they had a substitute fabricated that was equal in their minds to what
Christ had given.

(5) The principle: any given substitute gospel must be equal in
elaboration to the level of excellence with which the true gospel is
presented.

(6) And the elaborate substitute that the citizens of these bad towns
had must have been something quite amazing. It was most likely the
emotional appeal of the zealot movement that was so prevalent in Galilee
during that time.

(7) So a warning: political zealotry is a powerful substitute for
spirituality.

The second woe is pronounced against Capernaum.

A quote was popular in Capernaum during that time: You will you be
lifted as far as heaven.

Christ has taken the quote from some popular theme about Capernaum.
Apparently, this was a catch-phrase around that town. It was apparently
employed to denote the entire town, and placed with some condition of
zealotry. “If you throw off the Romans, you will be lifted as far as
heaven.”

Christ places this catch-phrase in a sentence which expects a negative
answer. This is accomplished by the placement of the negative adverb ME
within the Greek question.

But Christ refutes this, and indicates the evil of their pride.

Isaiah 14:14 comes close to their quote, and this is not good. “I will
ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will make myself like the Most
High.”

(1) But of course this is the prehistoric quote of Satan at his
rejection of the grace offer of God.

(2) And it is pure evil. The citizens of Capernaum had adopted a slogan
straight from the devil’s quotebook.

(3) Their system of works had replaced one of the most compelling
presentations of the gospel of all time. It is no surprise that they had
adopted Satan’s very own slogan.

So Christ replies with Isaiah 14:15: “Nevertheless you will be thrust
down to Sheol, to the recesses of the pit.”

An outline of Isaiah 14:4-20. The pronouncement of the end of the
oppressor.

The pronouncement, vv.4b-6, “How the oppressor has ceased, ceased the
insolent fury. Yahweh has broken the staff of the wicked, the scepter of
rulers. Unceasing blows that smote the peoples in wrath; unrelenting
persecution that ruled the nations in anger.”

(1) The pronouncement of the end, v.4b.

(2) The source of the end, v.5.

(3) The reason for the end, v.6.

The effect on earth, vv.7-8, “The whole earth is at rest and quiet; they
break forth into singing. The cypresses rejoice at you, the cedars of
Lebanon…”since you were laid low no hewer comes against us."

(1) The effect upon other nations, v.7.

(2) The effect upon the trees, v.8.

(3) The pronouncement in Sheol, vv.9-10, “Sheol beneath is stirred up to
meet you when you come; The shades who were all leaders of the earth
rouse to greet you; all who were kings of the nations rise from their
thrones. All of them will speak and say to you,”You too have become as
weak as we; you have become like us.“”

The effect upon the unbeliever kings, v.9.

The response of unbeliever kings, v.10.

The pronouncement to the oppressor, vv.11-12, “Your pomp is brought
down, the sound of your harps beneath you; maggots are your bed and
worms are your covering. How you are fallen from heaven O Day Star, son
of Dawn; you are cut down to the ground, you who laid low the nations.”

(1) The fanfare of the pronouncement, v.11a.

(2) The uniform of the pronouncement, v.11b.

(3) The pronouncement proper, v.12.

The reason for the pronouncement, vv.13-15, “You said in your heart,”I
will ascend to heaven, I will set on high my throne above the stars of
God; I will sit on the mount of assembly in the far north. I will ascend
above the heights of the clouds I will make myself like the Most High.
But you are brought down to Sheol, to the depths of the Pit."

(1) The ambition to the heavenly throne and authority, v.13.

(2) The ambition to the divine capabilities and essence, v.14.

(3) The reality of the judgment, v.15.

The continuation of the Sheol reaction, vv.16-17, “Those who see you
will stare at you and ponder over you; Is this the man who made the
earth tremble, who shook kingdoms, who made the world like a desert and
overthrew its cities, who did not let his prisoners go home?”

(1) The contrast of a career and its end, v.16.

(2) The contrast continued, v.17.

The final divine comment, vv.18-20, “All the kings of the nations lie in
glory each in his own tomb. But you are cast out from your sepulchre,
loathed like a miscarriage, clothed with the slain, even those pierced
by the sword, who go down to the stones of the Pit like a dead body
trodden under foot. You will not be joined with them in burial because
you have destroyed your land; you have slain your people. May the
descendants of evildoers nevermore be named.”

(1) The status quo in Sheol, v.18.

(2) The contrast with the king of Babylon, vv.19-20.

So you see, Christ has placed Capernaum with the judgment of the fallen
angels at the second advent. In fact, they will be among the unbelievers
filled with dismay at the fall of Satan!

So Capernaum is compared with Sodom, and the ground of Sodom, which was
nuked by God, will receive a better judgment that Capernaum.

Everyone knew the former location of Sodom - the bottom of the Dead Sea.
To compare the last judgment of the bottom of the Dead Sea with the
people of Capernaum is a strong vilification indeed.

The Easy Yoke
-------------

Matthew11:25-30, “(25) During that time Jesus, after formulating an
answer, said, ‘I confess outwardly to you, Father, Lord of heaven and of
earth, that You have hidden these things from the wise men and
understanding men and You revealed them to very young children. (26)
Yes, Father, so also it became well-pleasing before your face. (27) All
things have been given over to Me by My Father, and none fully knows the
Son except the Father, nor does anyone fully know the Father, except the
Son and in whatever way the Son wishes to reveal Him. (28) Come to Me
everyone who is laboring and heavily burdened, and I will give you rest.
(29) Take up My yoke upon you and learn from Me, that I am an easy and
humble heart, and you will find rest for your souls; (30) For My yoke is
flexible and My burden is light.’”

Outline:

Introduction to the prayer, v.25a.

The body of the prayer, vv.25b-26.

The sermon from the prayer, vv.27-29.

The principle of the authority and power of the Son, v.27a.

The principle of the knowledge of the son, v.27b.

The appeal to the slaves of the cosmic system, v.28.

The manumission for cosmic slaves, v.29.

The principle of manumission, v.30.

Verses 25-26, “(25) During that time Jesus, after formulating an answer,
said, ‘I confess outwardly to you, Father, Lord of heaven and of earth,
that You have hidden these things from the wise men and understanding
men and You revealed them to nursing babes. (26) Yes, Father, so also it
became well-pleasing before your face.”

The preposition EN plus the dative case phrase EKEINO TO KAIRO denotes
time during. So it is translated ‘during that time.’

This is at the same time that He is pronouncing woes against Bethsaida,
Chorazin, and Capernaum.

The aorist participle APOKRITHEIS is translated ‘after formulating an
answer.’ Christ had thought about the proper response to God on the
pronouncement of woes for the three cities of Galilee.

You see, Christ considered this a difficult thing, and He had to
formulate the proper prayer in His own mind.

It was difficult because it was rejection, and the rejection of Christ’s
kingdom was personal to Him. Therefore He experienced temptation with
regard to rejection and personal attack.

It was difficult because in letting the justice of God operate toward
these towns there was harsh judgment.

You can rest assured that whatever answer Christ formulates, it will be
adequate for most questions in the same vein.

Christ confesses outwardly to the Father. This is the verb EXOMOLOGEO in
its present active indicative form. Christ exudes a certain
self-consciousness in this prayer. The outward confession reflects the
inner prayer exactly, and that is what HOMOLOGEO means - to ‘say the
same thing.’

Christ has decided to make this particular prayer public for our
benefit; so that we might learn from His application toward the Father.

And please note: this application is definitely toward the Father, as
much application should be.

Take this pattern for yourselves. Go to the Father with your
applications. Listen. You are in constant danger of making your
spiritual lives an empty academic pursuit. When you leave God out of the
application cycle of your lives, you are flirting with that.

Christ confesses outwardly in order to demonstrate that He too applies
through prayer.

Jesus addresses the prayer by calling the Father the Lord of heaven and
earth. He is here following the pattern of His own recommendations in
the Lord’s prayer.

But there is an interesting distinction; here Christ concentrates on the
sovereignty of God apart above all - the universal kingdom of God. Alva
J. McLain, in the fourth chapter of his masterful The Greatness of the
Kingdom points out some important distinctions of the universal kingdom
of God.

This Universal Kingdom exists without interruption throughout all time.

The Universal Kingdom includes all that exists in space and time.

The Divine control in the Universal Kingdom is generally providential.

(1) By the term “providential” we mean control by means of second
causes.

(2) (McClain goes on to explain this as the rule of God over nature).

(3) Because in His Universal Kingdom God controls the processes of
material nature, He is able by such means to control the circumstances
of human existence and thereby direct the stream of history.

(4) McClain illustrates by the book of Esther, and the crucial night of
the narrative: “…at stake, in a very real sense, was the entire divine
program for the ages. If Israel perished, there would be no Messiah, no
redemption, no Church, no future Kingdom of God among men. With such
issues in jeopardy, we might not have been too much surprised to see the
arm of Deity breaking forth into the affairs of men with some great
supernatural intervention; perhaps something like the deliverance of
Israel from the hand of the Egyptian Pharaoh. But nothing of the kind
happens. There is not even any mention of God. The writer of the Book of
Esther merely records what might be regarded as the master
understatement of all time: “On that night could not the king sleep”
(6:1). Why he could not sleep, we are not told.”

(5) Fire and hail; snow, and vapors; stormy wind fulfilling His word”
(Psalm 148:8).

The divine control in the Universal Kingdom may be exercised at times by
supernatural means.

(1) The God of the universe is said to be both in the universe and above
it. Therefore at any time He may break into the so-called “closed
system” of nature with great exhibitions of His unveiled power.

(2) The resort to miracles in the rule of the Universal Kingdom does not
mean necessarily that God might not be bale to accomplish His purposes
by other and less spectacular means. The supernatural method is rather
for the purpose of demonstrating publicly that there is a true God in
heaven who always will have the last word in human affairs.

The Universal Kingdom always exists efficaciously regardless of the
attitude of its subjects.

The rule of the Universal Kingdom is administered through the eternal
Son.

This Universal Kingdom is not exactly identical with that Kingdom for
which our Lord taught His disciples to pray.

(1) He said, “Thy kingdom come.”

(2) But here, Christ says “All things have been given to Me.”

As Thieme summarizes: “It is also true that our Lord today, as always,
rules in the Universal Kingdom of God, which is administered through
providence. Jesus Christ is the absolute ruler over all, but allows
human volition to choose His rule until such time as the forces of evil
are bound.”

So He is not following the Lord’s prayer pattern exactly.

Important note: when Christ depends on the Father during the
incarnation, He depends on the function of the Universal Kingdom.

He depends on providence and miracles, because He is shackled by
kenosis. He cannot function as the universal ruler while He is on the
planet.

So Christ calls the Father the Lord of Heaven and Earth, recognizing His
universal rule.

But He must come to recognize His own kenosis at the same time.

And this is a great application, even in the address portion of this
public prayer. It is a recognition of His own kenosis related to
judgment.

For Christ, there will be a time for judgment, but this is not it. He
will not be vindicated just yet - and that is why the mention of the
last judgment and not current judgment in divine discipline.

Christ understands the Father as the judge and ruler during the
incarnation because He cannot under the rules of kenosis.

We too must function under a semblance of kenosis. God’s power is not at
our fingertips to chase all problems away as we would like. Kenosis is a
necessity while we live in the devil’s world.

Rather, we operate under a system of dependency on the power of God the
Holy Spirit related to the word of God.

And the word of God solves problems on the level of the soul, so that
God can act faithfully after the pattern of His word.

The supernatural essence of divine intervention in the church age is as
follows.

Through the transformation of the soul.

Through interdiction in the events of our lives, guiding and shaping us
through discipline, blessing, and undeserved suffering.

Christ begins the body of this prayer with the aorist Greek verb
EKRUPSAS. This summarizes a past action of God.

During some past time, God hid certain things from the wise and
understanding men of the world.

The certain things must have to do with what He has just said about the
judgment of the Galilean cities. That is, God hid His final judgment of
these cities from wise and understanding men.

Even the wisest and most intelligent men cannot perceive the judgments
of God. At least the wise and intelligent ones according to the cosmic
standards.

Christ is here concentrating on faith perception - something that even a
NEPIOIS (very young child can do. The system of faith perception is
crucial to the human race, because it depends only on volition in trust
of someone else’s merit and integrity.

In Matthew chapter eighteen, verses one through six, Christ comments on
the destruction of this child-like faith through child abuse: “(1) At
that time the disciples came to Jesus and said, ‘Who then is greatest in
the kingdom of heaven?’ (2) And He called a child to Himself and set him
before them, (3) and said, ‘Truly I say to you, unless you are converted
and become like children, you will not enter the kingdom of heaven. (4)
Whoever then humbles himself as this child, he is the greatest in the
kingdom of heaven. (5) And whoever receives one such child in My name
receives Me; (6) but whoever causes one of these little ones who believe
in Me to stumble, it would be better for him to have a heavy millstone
hung around his neck, and to be drowned in the depth of the sea.’”

On this passage, R.B. Thieme Jr. comments, “Childlike faith in parents
is natural on the part of a child and part of the divine institution of
marriage and the family. Marriage is the state in which one should have
children. The child is dependent on the parents. Consequently, any form
of child abuse is betrayal and instant shock for the child. The child
has a faith directed toward his parents that he will never have again.
Therefore, the most important learning period in the life of a child is
between ages one through six. This is when the personality is formed. In
child abuse, this faith can be destroyed and puts scar tissue on the
child’s soul and destroys faith as a system of perception. Child abuse
also destroys humility because the child becomes preoccupied with self.”

“Humility is not acquired genetically. It is the status of being humble
and being humble is the antithesis of arrogance. It is acquired first
through authority orientation. For the child, this begins with the
parents. Humility must be attained through the teaching and the just and
loving function of the authority of the parents. Humility as
teachability recognizes two authorities: the authority of the parents
and the content of their teaching and the authority of the pastor and
the content of his teaching. The greatest humility function of the child
is what he learns in the home. Child abuse destroys teachability at the
most critical point in life and substitutes arrogant preoccupation with
self, a lifetime habit which is almost impossible to break apart from
Bible doctrine.”

There are at least five categories of child abuse.

Incest or sexual abuse. This includes exposing yourself to your
children. Parents, siblings, relatives, or others are victimizing and
traumatizing a child through various categories of sexual activity.

Physical abuse. This includes torture, burning of children, bashing,
beatings, physical injury, and even murder.

Soul abuse. This is destruction of the child’s faith and humility.

(1) This is also failure to function as the FLOT of the soul for your
children during their formative years (ages one through six) as per Mt
18:5; Eph 6:4; and Col 3:21.

(2) This is also failure of Christian parents to evangelize their
children and failure to teach your child basic doctrine.

(3) Failure to teach your child’s conscience the difference between
right and wrong.

(4) Failure to render just punishment when a child is wrong or has
violated establishment principles. When people do not punish their
children when their children are wrong, the children will accumulate and
perpetuate guilt, which is a guarantee of emotional revolt of the soul.

(5) Teaching your child to hate the other parent in a divorce is soul
abuse. Children should never be involved or take sides in the problems
and antagonisms that occur in marriage. Differences should be solved
away from the children.

(6) Failure to teach the principle of authority in the home is soul
abuse.

Emotional abuse.

(1) This includes parents seeking to control their children through the
emotional complex of sins.

(2) This includes belittling, bullying, isolation, arousing fear by
threatening, rage, fear, shame, guilt, defense mechanisms, sleep
disturbances, loss of faith and humility necessary for learning,
threatening to take away their toys or do harm to a pet dog or cat.

(3) Never make a child feel guilty; to make a child do things because
you have instilled guilt in them is not a true sense of responsibility
but a neurotic approach. Parents should never motivate their children
through anger, hatred, malice, tantrums, or violence.

(4) Parents must never encourage either insensitivity or
hypersensitivity.

(5) Children should never be permitted to sulk in self-pity, or to whine
or snivel, which is arrogant preoccupation with self.

(6) Parents should never encourage jealousy, bitterness, slander,
judging, lying, or any form of vilification of other children. Spanking
removes guilt. If the child is not spanked justly, then guilt builds up
and results in neurosis.

Neglect and Deprivation.

(1) This includes failure to provide the necessities of life (food,
shelter, clothing), failure to teach the basic concepts of life (like
good hygiene, vocabulary, how to think), failure to provide protection
from abuse (medical care).

(2) There are five thinking skills which a child must learn before they
leave the home and go to school: perception, memory, problem solving,
decision making, and creativity. Most things we learn in life, we learn
at a very early age. Social skills, spiritual skills, thinking skills,
must be taught by parents in the home before the child learns
competitive skills in school.

(3) Child abuse destroys both social and thinking skills, leaving the
child to struggle with the maladaptive defense mechanisms and the
competitive skills which handicap their start in life. Competitive
skills minus thinking and social skills result in general maladaptation
and unsuitable behavior.

(4) When the spiritual skills are missing, it is an even greater
disaster. Competitive skills come naturally. All categories of child
abuse result in some form of traumatic stress disorder.

It is therefore not through empirical or experimental perception that
these things are understood. The greatest scientist in the world could
not find doctrine with the finest telescope ever made.

10. Nor is it through reason. The most amazing philosophical genius in
the world could not find doctrine within the confines of his own mind,
no matter how hard he concentrated.

11. Rather, it is through faith that knowledge of the truth comes. Faith
is not dependent on the genius of the subject, but rather the trust of
the subject plus the genius and integrity of the object. This is what
Christ refers to.

Verse twenty-six now focuses on the direct will of God.

EUDOKIA has in focus the faculties of judgment in an individual. The
verb DOKEO is related to this word, and it has to do with thinking or
supposing in the realm of subjective opinion. In a negative sense, it
can mean to presume or assume. When EU is added, it means to come to a
positive conclusion. To ‘seem well.’

Christ is almost being facetious here in a way, because He is saying,
well, Father, in your opinion it looked good. It’s just that the
Father’s opinion is always right.

So God considered things, and it looked good to Him to make faith the
basis for perception of spiritual principles.

And you see this prayer is a sermon; it was in the good opinion of God
to make faith the basis for perception. One thing immediately comes to
mind: that Christ’s hearers on that day would need to accept by faith
His words on the evil of the three Galilean cities.

Those words were not up for debate; they did not need to be verified by
any wise man; Christ said it, and they need to abide by it as children
need to abide by faith.

Verse Twenty-seven: “All things have been given over to Me by My Father,
and no one fully knows the Son except the Father, nor does anyone fully
know the Father, except the Son and in whatever way the Son wishes to
reveal Him.”

II. Now this does stand as verification from Christ. Ultimately you are
going to have to take Christ’s word for it, and this should apply to all
efforts toward evangelism through apologetics.

Principle: you never have to debate with positive volition!

Principle: never assume you are dealing with dead-set negative volition!

First is the principle of authority: Christ has absolute authority to
say what He has said about the judgment of the apostate cities.

PANTA is the adjective-turned noun. It is translated ‘everything.’

The verb is PARADIDOMI, which means to ‘give over.’ It here describes
the transfer of authority to Jesus Christ upon His incarnation.

See: The Night before Christmas.

This is kind of interesting when you combine it with an understanding of
kenosis.

All things have been given to Christ.

To establish His kingdom on earth;

To accomplish the plan of God for His life. In this case, the ‘all
things’ refers to the portfolio of grace assets, so that Christ could
grow to spiritual maturity and take the witness stand for God as the
star witness in the angelic conflict.

And it really comes down to the Spirit and the Word. God intervenes on
the basis of the word operating in your soul.

But this authority does not extend in all ways to church age believers.

Although we have the same grace assets for spiritual growth, in no way
do we have the authority to establish Christ’s kingdom on earth. That
can only be accomplished through the second advent.

There is an authority, however, to pass on the teachings of Jesus
Christ.

Matthew 28:18-20: “(18) And while going together, Jesus spoke to them
saying, ‘All authority was given to Me in heaven and on earth. (19)
Therefore after going make disciples of all nations, baptizing them into
the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, (20) teaching
them to keep everything of what quality I commanded you; and behold I am
with you all the days until the completion of the age.’”

This represents the transfer of authority to make disciples of all
nations.

In no way does Christ give His disciples the authority to establish His
kingdom on earth. That moment is indeed reserved for the second advent
only, as made clear by Revelation19:11f.

But the authority does encompass the realm of making disciples. This
making of disciples is described by two parallel statements:

(1) Baptizing them into the name of the Father and Son and the Holy
Spirit.

(2) Teaching to keep everything of what quality I commanded you.

These parallels are two sides to the same coin; they do not however
describe successive events.

(1) Baptizing and teaching are intended to be one in the same.

(2) Christ uses BAPTIZONTES in its basic sense of changing something by
immersion. It is not intended as some magic formula of speaking during
the water baptism of an individual.

(3) The disciples are to be made by changing them by immersion into the
name of the trinity.

(4) The name of anyone represented their very essence or character; so
the new disciples are to be immersed into the character of God.

(5) DIDASKONTES is exactly parallel in all grammatical respects to
BAPTIZONTES. It also gives further explanation to the baptizing action.

(6) So the disciples are to be changed by immersion into the character
of the Trinity, and the immersing action is to be teaching along the
quality of what Christ had commanded them.

Now this is the authority we have during the church age.

(1) We have the authority to advance in our own spiritual lives.

(a) We have the authority to access the power of the Spirit for the
intake and recall of Bible Truth;

(b) Having that authority means that God is faithful to a promise; our
free will must act to do both of these things.

(2) We have the authority to perform our ambassadorial functions in
disseminating the gospel and finding the lost sheep of Christendom.

(3) We have the authority to function under our spiritual gifts within
the validating function of the local church authority for gifts with
authority.

We can have tremendous confidence in this: that it worked for Christ.

The delegation of authority to Christ for spiritual growth worked in
perfect fashion, so that He resisted the gravest temptations of the
enemy.

His temptations were not only extreme by nature, but also complex, and
He stayed in the plan of God, even to the cross.

And if it worked at the cross, then it can work for you.

Principle: the Son reveals the Father.

The Son is a revelation of the power of God.

In His miracles, healings, and demon exorcisms.

In His transfiguration. Matthew 17:2, “And He was transfigured before
them; and His face shone like the sun, and His garments became as white
as light.”

In His resurrection. Romans 1:4, “Christ Jesus… who was declared the Son
of God with power by the resurrection from the dead, according to the
Spirit of holiness, Jesus Christ our Lord…”

The Son is truly a revelation of the character of God.

In His kenosis. Philippians 2:5-8, “(5) Have this attitude in yourselves
which was also in Christ Jesus, (6) who, although He existed in the form
of God, did not regard equality with God a thing to be grasped, (7) but
emptied Himself, taking the form of a bond-servant, and being made in
the likeness of men. (8) Being found in appearance as a man, He humbled
Himself by becoming obedient to the point of death, even death on a
cross.”

In His cross.

The Son is a revelation of the plan of God.

In His testing.

In His prosperity.

There is full-knowledge between the Son and the Father, because they
existed together in perfect fellowship in eternity past.

This is the foundational model for all love relationships.

This relationship was so great that God the Father desired it to
overflow into the creation of angels who could appreciate it as well.

Summary: John 14:1-11, “(1) ‘Do not let your heart be troubled; believe
in God, believe also in Me. (2) In My Father’s house are many dwelling
places; if it were not so, I would have told you; for I go to prepare a
place for you. (3) If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come
again and receive you to Myself, that where I am, there you may be also.
(4) And you know the way where I am going.’ (5) Thomas said to Him,
‘Lord, we do not know where You are going, how do we know the way?’ (6)
Jesus said to him, ‘I am the way, and the truth, and the life; no one
comes to the Father but through Me. (7) If you had known Me, you would
have known My Father also; from now on you know Him, and have seen Him.’
(8) Philip said to Him, ‘Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for
us.’ (9) Jesus said to him, ‘Have I been so long with you, and yet you
have not come to know Me, Philip? He who has seen Me has seen the
Father; how can you say, ‘Show us the Father/’ (10) Do you not believe
that I am in the Father, and the Father is in Me? The words that I say
to you I do not speak on My own initiative, but the Father abiding in Me
does His works. (11) Believe Me that I am in the Father and the Father
is in Me; otherwise believe because of the works themselves.’”

Now let’s put this in the immediate context. The Son reveals the Father,
so that if the Son has something particularly difficult to say, then you
can rest assured that it is a revelation of the policy and plan and
attitude of the Father.

And now this: 1 Corinthians 2:16 tells us that Scripture is the mind of
Christ. It is a revelation of His mental attitude on every aspect of
human life and experience. It also reveals the Father with complete
accuracy.

Sometimes Scripture has difficult things to say. It has many passages
that are tough-love passages - tough minded passages.

It reveals rugged discipline and even the ultimate discipline for the
rejection of Christ as savior. It does indeed reveal the Lake of Fire.

Yet this is the mind of Christ and the plan and policy of the Father.
Humility is the only proper course.

Verse 28: “Come to Me everyone who is laboring and heavily burdened, and
I will give you rest.”

First of all, Christ has the power to do this; all things have been
given over to Him.

The labor and heavy burden is the individual branch of the cosmic
system.

KOPIONTES is labor and toil - hard and heavy work.

PEPHORTISMENOI is the person under a heavy burden.

This, my friends, is backpacking.

The cosmic system is heavy labor because it takes a lot of thinking to
rationalize and perpetuate your existence there.

The cosmic system is heavy labor because it involves a great deal of
cognitive dissonance, where the world does not match up with your
beliefs.

The cosmic system is heavy labor because it involves a tremendous amount
of divine discipline.

The cosmic system involves a lot of emotional pain, and even sometimes
physical pain.

The individual branch of the cosmic system tends toward self destruction
under six categories of lust:

Approbation lust.

Stimulation lust.

Emotional lust.

Money and material lust.

Lust for blood and violence.

Power lust.

All categories of lust are characterized by their chains to this world.
1 John 2:17, “The world is passing away, and also its lusts; but the one
who does the will of God lives forever.”

Nothing that is lusted for may ever be brought from this world.

In fact, nothing at all but your human spirit and your soul - and the
truth that is in them.

The only true production is the production of intake and application;
everything else in this world is quite secondary.

Romans 8:18 puts things in the proper perspective: “For I consider that
the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with
the glory that is to be revealed.”

There is greater glory in eternity than all this! Greater glory.

The Old Sin Nature is Satan’s secret agent in the flesh.

The Sin Nature resides in the cell structure of the body, and issues
temptations to the soul.

There are two general trends to the sin nature:

The trend toward self-righteous arrogance.

The trend toward lascivious lawlessness.

Generally a person will tend toward one or the other during a given
period of life. Sometimes one will drive the other in a binary system of
sin.

The Law of Volitional Responsibility ensures that the yoke of the cosmic
system is heavy indeed. This Law is one of the great principles of the
divine decree, set forth as a condition for all of human history.

This Law is set forth in Hosea 8:7, “For they sow the wind and they reap
the whirlwind.”

And it is a promise that justice will always operate toward human free
will. It is a promise from eternity past.

General principles on the cosmic system.

Human history is the resolution of the prehistoric angelic conflict.

In order to vindicate himself and His judgment of the fallen angels, God
conceived a plan by which sinful human beings could glorify Him.

In order to justify his rejection of the prehistoric grace offer from
God, Satan conceived a system designed to counteract the plan of God.

In God’s thinking, human beings can only vindicate him by the free use
of volition.

In Satan’s thinking, human beings can be restrained from vindicating God
if they are enslaved by his system.

Therefore, the purpose of the cosmic system is as follows:

The Purpose of the Cosmic system.

To keep unbelievers from believing in Jesus Christ.

By attacking the gospel.

(1) Destroy it.

(2) Replace it.

The attack against soul: addiction.

To destroy the believer’s relationship with God.

Attacks against the faith perception of the truth.

The attack against relationship with God: Personal sin and human good.

The attack against the soul: addiction.

The attack against the plan of God: Operation Counterfeit.

To bring in his own millennium through internationalism.

The cosmic system is a progression of misery that all begins with
maladjustment to some aspect of God’s essence, capabilities, or
attributes (Review Cosmic System).

But Christ says to us that He will give us rest. This is the future
indicative verb ANAPAUSO. It is a standard verb for the notion of rest.

We get rest from the runaround, the evil runaround of the cosmic system.

And we get the ultimate rest of the Sabbath - the time logged in
relationship with God.

There are three Sabbaths in the Christian life of the church age:

The Sabbath of dependence on God at any level of maturity.

The Sabbath of the promised land of spiritual maturity.

The Sabbath of the eternal rest.

Verses Twenty Nine and Thirty: “(29) Take up My yoke upon you and learn
from Me, that I am an easy and humble heart, and you will find rest for
your souls; (30) For My yoke is flexible and My burden is light.’”

The aorist imperative verb ARATE is a command from Christ.

The aorist tense makes it clear that the hearers are to take this action
immediately. It is a sharp command.

The verb itself means to take or pick something up. The picture is take
pick up a yoke for yourself - a ZUGON.

Of course, this is something that a beast of burden or a slave could
never do. This is one yoke that we must pick for ourselves; one burden
that we must choose.

And this means that it has nothing at all to do with slavery. Satan
wants to put a yoke on you; God wants you to choose His yoke on the
basis of its own merits.

AA. The second command is related to the first. It should not surprise
us at all. It is MATHETE, and another aorist imperative. MANTHANO means
to learn something through a process of instruction - through a teacher.

So the burden of Christ involves learning on a program of instruction.

The explanation then comes. Christ is an easy and humble heart.

Teaching comes from the heart, and the heart of Christ is easy - PRAUS.
PRAUS is a noun often used in the context of animal training. It can
apply equally to trainer and animal trained.

(1) With regard to the animal trained, it implies the tame nature of the
animal.

(2) With regard to the human trainer, it implies the approach and
demeanor of that person.

The heart of Christ is also humble, TAPEINOS. He is a humble, not
arrogant teacher.

(1) This makes the process of learning infinitely easier. The humility
of the teacher makes the lesson so much easier to digest.

(2) Arrogant teachers are easy to detect, and difficult to take.

And this can be the heart of any teacher of truth… but -

This does not mean the teacher cannot be tough when the occasion calls
for it.

And even easy and humble teachers must be tough according to the subject
matter. Toughness in teaching may often be an act of compassion.

BB. You will find rest for your souls in the teaching of Christ.

The future active indicative HEURESETE tells of the certain futurity of
the Sabbath rest for anyone who takes the learning yoke from Christ.

This is a Sabbath rest from sin that comes to anyone who gets into
fellowship.

But the implication is interesting: getting into fellowship demands
learning from the word of God. That is the demand of fellowship. This is
such a fantastic and strong validation of our lifestyle.

CC. The final verse reinforces the truth of the preceding.

The yoke of Christ is flexible, which is CHRESTOS. CHRESTOS can means a
‘jack of all trades’ and a sort of Swiss army knife usability.

The burden is light, which is ELAPHRON. There is no great burden to bear
in the plan of God.

The Sinful Woman Forgiven
-------------------------

Luke 7:36-50

Translation: “(36) But one of the Pharisees kept on asking Him that He
might eat with him, and entering into the house of the Pharisee He sat
down. (37) And behold a sinful woman who was in the city, and… after
being sure that He was reclining in the house of the Pharisee, after
buying an alabaster jar of perfume (38) and after standing behind at the
side of His feet, after crying - she began to wet His feet with tears
and with the hair of her head kept on drying off and kissing His feet
and anointing with the perfume. (39) And seeing this, the Pharisee who
invited Him spoke to Himself, saying, ‘If this man were a prophet, he
would have known all along who and what kind this woman is who touches
Him, that she is a sinner.’ (40) And after formulating an answer, Jesus
said to him, ‘Simon, I have something to say to you.’ And he replied,
‘Teacher, speak.’ (41) There were two debtors for a certain moneylender,
one who owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty. (42) Not being
able to pay him back, he gave grace to them both. Therefore who of them
loved him more? (43) After formulating an answer, Simon said, ‘I take it
that the one to whom he forgave more.’ And He said to him, ‘You judge
rightly.’ (44) And after turning toward the woman, He said to Simon,
‘See this woman? I entered into your house, you gave me no water for my
feet! But she wet my feet with tears, and wiped them with her hair. (45)
You gave Me no kiss; but she from when I entered did not stop kissing My
feet. (46) You did not anoint Me with oil; but she anointed my feet with
perfume. (47) For this thanks I say to you, her many sins have been
forgiven, so she loved much, and to him who is forgiven little, loves
little.’ (48) And He said to her, ‘Your sins have been forgiven.’ (49)
And those who were reclining at the table with Him began to speak among
themselves, ‘Who is this man who even forgives sins?’ (50) And He said
to the woman, ‘Your faith has saved you, go in peace.’”

Outline:

The Setting, v.36.

The Incident of the Sinful Woman, vv.37-38.

The Response of the Pharisee, v.39.

The Response in Turn of Christ, vv.40-48.

Christ gets Simon’s attention, v.40.

The parable and the question, vv.41-42.

The answer of Simon and approval of Christ, v.43.

Christ’s reproof of Simon, vv.44-47.

No water, v.44.

No kiss, v.45.

No anointing, v.46.

No love, v.47.

Christ’s affirmation of forgiveness to the woman, v.48.

The response of the Pharisees present, v.49.

Christ’s reply to the woman, v.50.

II. Exposition.

The setting of this incident is given by Luke in verse one. “But one of
the Pharisees asked Him that He might eat with him, and entering into
the house of the Pharisee He sat down.”

Since the Sermon on the Mount, there has been:

The healing of the centurion’s servant.

The raising of the widow’s son at Nain.

The sermon on the fall of John the Baptist.

The woes upon Bethsaida and Chorazin and Capernaum, including the yoke
of Christ.

So it cannot have been too long a time since that momentous presentation
of the kingdom. Perhaps two or three weeks, perhaps a little more or
less.

Having just given the rebellious Jews of Northern Galilee one more shot
at responding to His kingdom offer, Christ finds Himself the guest of a
Pharisee.

This is Simon, an unknown Pharisee, probably of Galilean origin. The
invitation is likely in response to Christ’s woes upon the cities of
Northern Galilee, and the offer of His kingdom yoke to those people. You
could bet that the Pharisee has some kind of agenda.

The imperfect active verb EROTA indicates that this Pharisee was
insistent about Christ being his guest at table.

TIS TON PHARISAION tells us that the Pharisee is unknown; that is the
function of the indefinite pronoun TIS. Luke was unable to put a
positive I.D. on the man even though he has a name: Simon. Joseph of
Arimathea and Nicodemus are the only other two Pharisees for whom we
have names.

So Christ enters and sits down - there is no indication that the meal
has even begun before what happens next.

Verses Thirty Seven and Thirty Eight record the actions of a certain
sinful woman: “(37) And behold a sinful woman who was in the city, and…
after being sure that He was reclining in the house of the Pharisee,
after buying an alabaster jar of perfume (38) and after standing behind
at the side of His feet, after crying - she began to wet His feet with
tears and with the hair of her head kept on drying off and kissing His
feet and anointing with the perfume.”

The grammatical structure is kind of fun, for Luke employs a little bit
of his skill in the area of Classical Greek drama.

He sets it up so that the woman is in the same town, and she makes ready
a list of things she must do to go see this Messiah.

The real drama lies in the tears of this woman, and Luke saves that for
the end - because this is a truly remarkable woman, and a truly
remarkable incident.

So there is a real sentence her that goes: “And behold a sinful woman
who was in the city, and she began to wet His feet, etc.”

But in between the giving of her location and the depiction of her
actions with Christ is her deliberations and actions and emotions. These
are all portrayed by aorist participles in the Greek, which have been
translated “after…”

Luke employs the imperative verb IDOU to catch the attention of his
readers. It is translated ‘Behold…’

This woman is given the descriptive adjective HAMARTOLOS. She is a
sinner. Well this is not just a ‘welcome to the club’ kind of
sinfulness. We are all sinners, and Luke knows that. But she is a sinner
in some more spectacular way.

The category of sin is tactfully and respectfully left indistinct by
Luke, even though his record of Simon’s words later in the passage gives
a stronger clue.

Because of Simon’s leering portrayal in verse 39, it is apparent that
this whole deal has something to do with immorality.

Immoral, yes; a prostitute maybe. But immorality is the category of sin
that separates this woman from her society.

First, she makes sure that Christ is reclining at this Pharisees’s
house.

This is indicated by the aorist participle EPIGNOUSA. EPIGINOSKO is a
verb which means ‘full knowledge.’

Here, she makes sure that Christ is at the place where He is rumored to
be. When Christ entered any place, rumors would fly and people were
talking wherever He went.

Making sure would mean either she sent someone, or more likely she
checked by herself.

The second thing she did was to buy an alabaster vial of perfume.

The aorist participle KOMISASA depicts her buying this vial. Apparently
there was a source near the home of the Pharisee.

An alabaster jar was an expensive container of crystalline gypsum.

MUROU is perfume; and perfume in the ancient world had three different
functions:

(1) Medicinal - as a function of hygiene, the perfumes of the ancient
world were based in vegetable and animal fat. Because of the dry climate
of the ancient near east, these perfumes were used as lotions to keep
the skin and hair from becoming too dry.

(2) Cosmetics - the perfumes of the ancient world were used as
deodorants, or at least as masks for body odors; also, certain perfumes
were employed as mouthwashes. In burial the perfume had a cosmetic
function in masking the smell of decay. Perfumes were employed in
love-making, as an additional treat to the senses. The Song of Solomon
confirms this several times. Perfume was also applied to clothes and
even furniture.

(3) Religion - anointing and incense were a part of religion; in works,
trying to please God with a pleasant scent; in grace, representing the
fragrance of righteousness going up to God.

So this sinful woman has a plan that includes expensive perfume;
normally one would consider that she had an attempt at seduction on her
mind. That she was going to give some sort of sensual temptation to our
Lord.

So now she has apparently entered the house and is standing behind
Christ and to His side. This description is given with the words: STASA
OPISO PARA TOUS PODAS AUTOU.

STASA is the aorist participle from HISTEMI. It is translated, ‘after
standing’

The preposition OPISO places the woman behind Christ as He reclines; the
additional preposition describes her as PARA, at His side. So if you can
imagine Christ laying on His side, facing the low table of the
Pharisee’s house, and the woman behind Him at the side of His feet -
TOUS PODAS AUTOU.

The final part of the setup comes from the aorist participle KLAIOUSA,
which means to cry.

This verb KLAIO is fairly equivalent to our ‘crying,’ and it indicates
some vocalization of grief or emotion, but not to the point of ecstatic
wailing.

This came with tears, and this woman finds herself full of emotion.

And there is more than one possibility for her tears. Either:

She is a sinner in the presence of righteousness, and she has found
herself helpless; or:

She is a sinner who has found forgiveness, and these are tears of
thankfulness.

Verse 47 answers the query: “…her many sins have been forgiven, so she
loved much.”

This woman is shedding tears of thankfulness. At some time in the past,
she has realized the atoning work that this Messiah will do, and she
believed.

Verse 50 confirms that she has already believed: “Your faith has saved
you, go in peace.”

So here is a premeditated act of worship from a woman who is a new
believer.

But Luke still classifies her as a sinful woman. This also can have two
possibilities.

(1) That she is still functioning under her sin nature, or:

(2) That the classification is difficult to shake.

But she is here at least in fellowship to give these acts of legitimate
thanksgiving to Christ, so it is likely the latter. Luke gives the
designation so that we can understand the response of the Pharisee.

10. The woman began to wet His feet - with the tears of her crying.

TOIS DAKRUSIN more properly goes with the sentence which follows, so
that it should be ‘she began to wet His feet with tears.’

She would only do this in order to wash the feet of our Lord.

Foot washing was a common thing in the ancient near east, thanks to the
custom of wearing sandals, and the general dustiness of the land.

The feet were most often the dirtiest part of the body due to this, and
so it was common courtesy to provide for the washing of the feet.

It would also become a metaphor for confession and forgiveness. When
Christ washes the feet of His disciples in John 13, He teaches them
something very important about the doctrine of fellowship, and it is on
account of the actions of this woman that He does so.

11. Next there are three verbs in the imperfect tense; the imperfect
tense portrays continuous action in the past.

EXEMASSEN means to wipe. She wiped His feet with the hair of her head.
The idea is that she is crying continuously, and wiping continuously.
There was no need for water.

KATEPHILEI means to kiss. She not only wiped His feet, but kissed them
as well. This represents great humility indeed.

ELEIPHEN means to anoint. She was continuously anointing Christ’s feet
with the MURON, perfuming them rubbing them smooth. This is the
medicinal function of this oily perfume.

This woman is performing a most humble service for our Lord, and doing
it in such as way as to demonstrate her thankfulness for what He will do
for her.

She understands that she is forgiven; and she has had faith in the
atoning work of the Messiah, yet to be done.

She knows of the suffering Messiah of Psalm 22 and Isaiah 53. She knows
that this man will suffer greatly on her behalf, and that she has a
great debt that she can never repay. Isaiah 53 defines what the Messiah
will do regarding sin; Psalm 22 defines the how.

Since she has already believed and received forgiveness, the woman is
not attempting to propagate some system of works onto Christ.

And these things that she does are humble works; they are stunning in
that regard. Washing someone else’s feet is the work of a slave.

This went on for some time, and Christ made no attempt to stop this
woman from her efforts. And so Simon the Pharisee could contain himself
no longer.

The thirty ninth verse contains that comment: “And seeing this, the
Pharisee who invited Him spoke to Himself, saying, ‘If this man were a
prophet, he would have known all along time who and what kind this woman
is who touches Him, that she is a sinner.’

Simon the Pharisee speaks to himself, EIPEN EN HEAUTO. Now, he still
spoke out loud, but his comment was directed at himself.

The comment itself is a leering one:

The conditional particle EI functions here to introduce the Pharisee’s
judgmental attitude against Christ.

This is a perfect example of a second class condition, which is the
contrary to fact conditional sentence in the Greek.

So the protasis is “If this man were a prophet.” But it assumes that
this is untrue. Although we know Christ is a prophet, the Pharisee does
not think so.

Now there is more. The Pharisee apparently invited Christ into his house
to test whether he was a prophet. But this is bogus in itself, for our
Lord is the Messiah, and therefore as John the Baptist said, He is much
more than a prophet.

The apodosis, or second half of the conditional sentence tells us why
Simon has judged harshly against Jesus.

He would have known - EGINOSKEN, the imperfect active indicative of
GINOSKO. Really, he would have known all along.

He would have known all along TIS KAI POTAPE HE GUNE HETIS HAPTETAI
AUTOU. Who and what kind the woman who touches Him.

(1) POTAPE is a relative pronoun of quality: it denotes usually good
quality, but here undermines the morality of this woman.

(2) HAPTETAI is to touch, but it is a sensual word. It means to touch a
flint so as to make a spark. To touch fire to kindling in order to bring
a flame to light. In the world of touching, it means to touch the skin
in a sensual manner.

So Simon identifies this woman as a sinner, and assumes that in spite of
all the crying and tears she is touching Christ so as to bring about
arousal.

And looking at Christ, he has to wonder why Christ has not brought this
supposedly erotic encounter to a halt; so all this goes through the mind
of this Pharisee as he witnesses one of the most tender moments in the
life of Christ.

And so in the fortieth verse, Christ must reply to this horrible and
callused accusation: “ And after formulating an answer, Jesus said to
him, ‘Simon, I have something to say to you.’ And he replied, ‘Teacher,
speak.’”

The aorist participle APOKRITHEIS shows that Christ thought about this
callused comment of Simon’s. ‘After formulating an answer.’

And then He speaks - I have something to say to you. Simon must be a
brave man, a Pharisee used to getting his way in debate, and confident
of his judgment even now, for he replies, ‘Teacher, speak.’

He employs the term of respect to Christ, DIDASKALE. RABBI in the
Hebrew. Although he has graded Christ down from Messiah to prophet, and
then again from prophet to teacher, the Pharisee still has a kind of
respect for Jesus.

The scathing statement of Christ comes out over the next several verses.
First is a short parable: “(41) There were two debtors for a certain
moneylender, one who owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
(42) Not being able to pay him back, he gave grace to them both.
Therefore who of them loved him more?”

This parable is designed to teach Simon a principle that only a Pharisee
could appreciate.

A Pharisee would not consider himself much of a sinner, since all of his
efforts were funneled into upholding the Law of Moses.

The debtor who owed five hundred denarii (a denarius was a day’s wage)
would be the sinful woman in their presence.

The debtor who owed just fifty denarii would be Simon the Pharisee.

God is the moneylender. Neither debtor is able to pay the debt, but one
has a greater debt than the other.

The word translated ‘forgave in the NASB is actually ECHARISATO - to
‘give grace.’ This parable definitely stays faithful to the doctrine of
total depravity. Neither is able to pay the moneylender, so in one sense
it doesn’t matter what the debts are. All we are like sheep who have
gone astray… All have sinned and fall short of the glory of God!

But the sinner with the greater debt likely has an even great
appreciation for the gracious attitude of the moneylender.

And this is the woman who is before them now. She had a great debt of
the soul to pay to this man before her, and she knew the terrible price
He would pay for her debt.

The question at the end is directed toward Simon.

Simon’s answer comes in verse 43: “After formulating an answer, Simon
said, ‘I take it that the one to whom he forgave more.’ And He said to
him, ‘You judge rightly.’”

The answer may be a little bit defensive, because the verb HUPOLAMBANO
means ‘I take it…’ This is not unlike our English idiom.

When someone gives a real obvious hint like holding out the car keys
before you and jingling them, you often would say: “I take it that you
want me to start the car.”

So Simon provides the obvious answer - and Christ says simply: ‘You
judge rightly.’ There is kind of a laconic phrasing to Christ’s summary,
because He is just about to lambaste this man with a barrage of comments
on his hospitality.

And even though what is to follow compares the man’s hospitality with
that of the sinful woman’s, it is really about something else.

It is going to be: “Here you are judging this woman and judging Me at
the same time, but I want you to know that she has the greater love for
God!”




“(44) And after turning toward the woman, He said to Simon, ‘See this
woman? I entered into your house, you gave me no water for my feet! But
she wet my feet with tears, and wiped them with her hair. (45) You gave
Me no kiss; but she from when I entered did not stop kissing My feet.
(46) You did not anoint Me with oil; but she anointed my feet with
perfume.”

The aorist participle STRAPHEIS describes to us that Christ rolled over,
away from the table and toward the woman. And while Christ is turned
toward the woman, He speaks to Simon.

Then Christ demonstrates verbally toward the woman; perhaps there is a
gesture as well. “See this woman?”

The woman has done three things that Simon has not; offered three
courtesies that this high-falutin’ religious official has not. Christ
lists them as an imprecation against the courtesy of this judgmental
man, and to teach him the meaning of forgiveness.

The sinful woman has accepted Christ with accuracy; the Pharisee has
taken Christ down two notches to ‘teacher.’ He is the Messiah, greater
than a prophet. And He is a prophet, greater than any teacher.

Take this in the right way, but you must always accept God for Who He
is. The woman had an accurate take on the Messiah, especially the
suffering Messiah.

God is perfect and infinite; He is living and three persons. God is
omnipresent, omniscient, and omnipotent. He has perfect righteousness
and love; perfect grace and order; perfect willpower and He never
changes; He has perfect integrity of communication.

And Christ was and is God. He is not just any prophet; and certainly not
just any teacher. He is more than a teacher or a prophet, for He is the
Son of God and Savior of the world; King of kings and Lord of lords. And
all of His words are Wisdom.

By showing Christ this great courtesy, the sinful woman has loved Christ
with accuracy. And for this, Christ lauds her as someone who truly loves
Him. And this is, of course, the plan of God for all sentient creatures.

The greatest commandment is to love God with everything that you have;
and this woman fulfilled that ideal magnificently - adulteress,
prostitute, or whatever.

10. In Christ, it does not ever matter what you have been; it matters
what He is. Christianity is not subjective, but objective - it
concentrates on God. It is worship with accuracy and even with detail.

11. Now this woman had no great complex of doctrine in her soul, either.
She was doing this humble service for Christ because that is what she
had, and she is giving her widow’s mite in a way.

12. Her small offering is given in love and in understanding the
doctrine of forgiveness; and this small act is also a legitimate
offering of worship. This action, these tears - they are as worshipful
as any great hymn or prayer of doctrine.

13. Her capacity for worship was indeed limited, but at least she is
exhibiting a vitality based on her understanding of one thing. And that
is good.

14. This demonstrates the value and importance of having a vital
spiritual life before God, no matter what doctrinal resources you might
have.

15. This Pharisee, Simon by name, had failed to pay even the slightest
respect to Christ - he had failed to give him even the commonest
courtesy of the day.

16. It is as though Christ were in the same class as this woman, at
least to Simon. But even if a prostitute were in your house (for some
legitimate reason), you would still show her some small form of
courtesy.

17. But Simon treats Christ with the respect that he would treat a
salesman or a telemarketer or even a prostitute. Really, with no respect
at all.

18. And here this woman gives Christ courtesy and it is not even her
house! She walks in and realizes that a discourtesy has been done to her
savior, and so she takes care of it without even a glance at the master
of the house. She does Simon’s job in an utterly humble way, and now he
treats her like this.

Verses Forty Seven and Forty Eight turn the attention of the narrative
back to the sinful woman. “(47) About which grace I say to you, her many
sins have been forgiven, so she loved much, and to him who is forgiven
little, loves little.’ (48) And He said to her, ‘Your sins have been
forgiven.’”

The first phrase of verse 47 is HOU CHARIN LEGO SOI.

The relative pronoun HOU picks up something that has been previously
mentioned and brings it forward so that it is related to the current
sentence. Here it is translated ‘about which…’

The noun CHARIN is in the accusative case, and it completes the thought
of the relative pronoun.

(1) This is the grace of God, as it applied to the woman.

(2) It is the salvation grace of the cross of Jesus Christ.

And then the verb LEGO and pronoun object SOI finish it off, “I say to
you.”

The second phrase is APHEONTAI HAI HAMARTIAI AUTES HAI POLLAI.

The most important part of the phrase is the verb, which is first.

(1) It is the perfect passive indicative verb meaning to ‘forgive.’ But
here understand the grammar of grace.

(2) The perfect tense gives the portrayal of an action that was
accomplished in the past, with lasting results - sometimes even
everlasting results.

(a) The sins of the woman are forgiven. In fact, they are forgiven
forever, due to the work of Christ.

(b) The saving nature of Christ’s substitutionary death accomplishes
forgiveness once for all. It is a perfect and lasting work.

(3) The passive voice indicates that the subject does not produce, but
rather receives the action of the verb. Her sins were forgiven by God;
she did not produce the forgiveness by herself.

(4) The indicative tells us that this is an absolute reality. It is not
hypothetical in any sense. The forgiveness is real.

The rest of it is just the subject of the forgiveness: her many sins.
Sins are forgiven.

The conjunction HOTI has an unusual connotation here, and that is
result.

The result of the forgiveness of her many sins was her great love.

The verb EGAPESEN with the adjective POLU portrays that very thing.

And this is a gnomic aorist, of sorts, for it gives us a general
principle about life: that if you are a spectacular sinner, it is likely
that your love for God will be much as well.

It is interesting that Luke employs AGAPAO here, the verb which
describes Christian virtue love. This is either love expressed toward
virtue, or love expressed virtuously toward that which is not virtuous.

And here is a principle: that the more serious sinners of this world owe
a greater debt to God, and when they realize the forgiving of that debt
they find it easier to love Him.

The greater the debt, the greater the love is the principle.

This implies that if you have a lesser debt, then it is more difficult
for you to love God. But not impossible!

How interesting that the less you have sinned, the more difficult it is
for you to love God.

For the requirement for all of us is that we love God with everything
that we have, and this is a requirement for all of us. It is just that
it is harder for those with a better track record to love God.

So there is an advantage to being a prolific and spectacular sinner. But
of course there is no way to get ahead on this if you are already a
believer. Romans 6:1-2 squashes this bug of an idea before it gets out
of hand: “(1) What shall we say then? Are we to continue in sin so that
grace may increase? (2) May it never be! How shall we who died to sin
still live in it?”

In contrast to this, the mundane and part-time sinner does not usually
love as much. This portrays a general trend, but of course even the
mundane sinner can come to love God just as much as the more achievement
oriented one.

The Pharisee is certainly the one here who does not love much at all, as
evidenced by his bypass of the simplest conventions of courtesy toward
Christ.

He loves Christ no more than he would love the worst of visitors in his
house. Christ is not the Messiah to him; He is not even a prophet.

Then Christ gives a reminder to the woman: APHEONTAI SOU HAI HAMARTIAI.

Again the perfect passive indicative verb indicates the final nature of
the woman’s forgiveness.

That final forgiveness was based on the integrity of God - it was based
on the fact that God was good for His word, and that Christ would go to
that cross and die for our sins.

Christ had not died yet, but God would be good for His word about the
remission of our sins.

This stands as a reminder to her, even though she was already a
believer. Remember, this woman walked into this house a believer, and
the washing of Christ’s feet represented her expression of love for that
forgiveness.

So Christ reminds her that her sins have been forgiven - which is
important for any believer in Christ to remember, because you are not
done sinning just yet, just because you are a Christian.

This reminder is motivational in two ways.

(1) First, as a reminder to resist temptation - by the love of God.

(2) And second, as a reminder to confess - also by the love of God.

“(49) And those who were reclining at the table with Him began to speak
among themselves, ‘Who is this man who even forgives sins?’”

The scene shifts briefly back to the men around the table. There are
more people at this gathering than just Simon and Christ.

As such, these are likely all Pharisees. This is after Christ has
upbraided Simon for his lack of love and lack of courtesy.

This reproof passes through them like a mist, and they hardly notice it.
For they hear one thing - that Christ forgives the woman’s sins.

In their accurate picture of God, they know that only God can forgive
sins. Well, they see this man here before them, passing along the
forgiveness of sins to this sinful woman, and they cannot stand it.

For this man cannot be man and God at the same time - that is blasphemy!

So they ignored the fact that Christ had just given reproof to them -
they ignored His legitimate authority over them and bickered about a
point of theology that they should have known.

They had conditioned themselves to only look for the Messiah that fit
their criteria. And Christ’s kingdom was far from their own ideals.

So it is not that a man could not be God at all. These Pharisees
understood the doctrine of the Messiah well enough.

But rather, it is that this man could not be the Messiah, and so He is a
blasphemer.

10. And so this is also a lesson that we can learn - to never impute our
preconceived ideas into what Scripture has to say - to let the words and
the passages speak for themselves.

11. These Pharisees were indeed practicing EISEGESIS, the imputation of
prejudice into interpretation.

12. They interpreted the life of Christ according to their preconceived
notion of what the Messiah would be like. As a result, they missed Him
and His benefits completely.

13. We must always accept God as He is, not as we want Him to be; we
must always accept Scripture as it is, not as we want it to be.

“(50) And He said to the woman, ‘Your faith has saved you, go in
peace.’”

Christ ends this incident with most appropriate reply of all. It is
intended as a contrast to the statement of the Pharisees.

The personal pronoun SOU tells all; it is possessive, in the genitive
case. It shows that the faith belonged to her, and to her alone.

The Pharisees had no faith in God or Scripture. Their primary faith was
in themselves.

The woman could go in peace, knowing that her faith had a permanent
result of salvation. The perfect tense verb SESOKEN establishes this
clearly.

The final command is for the woman to go in peace, POREUOU EIS EIRENEN.

There may be a little adjustment we need to make on this, on account of
the preposition EIS.

This preposition shows more of an entrance into a state than a status
quo.

The verb is a command that shows the earnest desire of Christ - it is a
present imperative.

The present imperative concentrates on a command that is to begin right
away and continue indefinitely.

So this woman is to go and keep on going in peace. Therefore the command
to ‘go’ is closer to ‘live.’

‘Live always in peace’ would be a fair rendition of this command.

The peace here is most likely a reference to the reconciliation unto God
that this woman has most recently experienced. This would be a command
to perpetuate the reconciliation by staying in fellowship with God.

This is accomplished naturally through the resistance to temptation, and
the confession of sin when failure is encountered.

This is remarkably similar to Romans 5:1: “Therefore having been
justified from faith, let us have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ…”

There is a pretty good chance that Paul had heard of this woman, and had
this incident in mind when he wrote those important words.

III. A Footnote on Footwashing: John Chapter 13.

Verse One: “Now before the Feast of the Passover, Jesus knowing that His
hour had come that He would depart out of this world to the Father,
having loved His own who were in the world, He loved them to the end.”

This is the introduction to the Last Supper, according to John’s
account. He provides invaluable information that none of the other
gospels contain, including this ceremony, and a very long speech.

The introduction to this foot washing is that Christ knew that He was
going to die, and that He loved His own disciples very much. In fact,
this foot washing would be a demonstration that Christ loved them to the
end.

Verses Two through Four: “(2) During supper, the devil having already
put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, to betray Him,
(3) Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into His hands,
and that He had come forth from God and was going back to God, (4) got
up from supper, and laid aside His garments; and taking a towel, He
girded Himself.”

The wheels were turning for the betrayal of our Lord. Judas, under the
demon influence of Satan himself is going to betray Him at any time.

Jesus knew that the Father had given all things into His hands, operated
calmly and deliberately in this desperate hour.

God had given Him everything - all authority and power to carry out His
mission on earth to the last detail.

This is indeed one of the last details before Christ’s return to the
Father. He has this ceremony, the last few words to say to the twelve,
and again to pray with the three, and then to His duty.

So this is important; and in His mind is a certain woman, a sinner full
of love for Him.

Verse Five: “Then He poured water into the basin, and began to wash the
disciples’ feet and to wipe them with the towel with which He was
girded.”

This simple ritual, this courtesy done by Christ to His disciples, was
the work of a servant or even of a slave.

It must have caught them by surprise, but they were somewhat conditioned
to follow His leadership, and not to question what He did. He was, after
all, the Messiah.

Christ did not care at all about the dirt and stink on the feet of His
disciples. He did not care whether He dirtied His hands by all of that…

Verses Six through Eleven: “(6) So he came to Simon Peter. He said to
Him, ‘Lord, do You wash my feet?’ (7) Jesus answered and said to him,
‘What I do you do not realize now, but you will understand hereafter.’
(8) Peter said to Him, ‘Never shall You wash my feet!’ Jesus answered
him, ‘If I do not wash you, you have no part with Me.’ (9) Simon Peter
said to Him, ‘Lord, then wash not only my feet, but also my hands and my
head.’ (10) Jesus said to him, ‘He who has bathed needs only to wash his
feet, but is completely clean; and you are clean, but not all of you.’
(11) For He knew the one who was betraying Him; for this reason He said,
‘Not all of you are clean.’”

The response of Simon Peter is interesting, because he expects an honest
answer. He anticipates neither a yes nor a no. It is a basic Greek
question.

Simon Peter is befuddled by this behavior of Christ’s!

So Christ gives Simon an honest answer: that he cannot know now what
Christ is doing, but soon it will become apparent.

This foot washing is meant to precede Christ’s work at the cross.
Interesting and intriguing, isn’t it?

With all the ballyhoo about the communion ritual, this is one that is
never talked about, and never practiced hardly at all. Yet this is on
that night that Christ is betrayed, it has a connection with the cross,
and it is passed on by Christ as a command. Interesting indeed.

Inexplicably Peter reacts in an emotional way against the action of
Christ. Perhaps the way that Christ said META TAUTA that Peter
understood it to be the death that Christ had foretold in Matthew 16:21
and many other places.

Peter had a history of wanting to prevent the death of Christ, and in
his ignorance, he did not understand or refused to understand the
necessity of the atonement.

Christ’s response to this outburst is concise. Taking part in this
footwashing is tantamount to partnership with Christ.

Christ meant this ritual to prepare them for the events of the next day.

10. And then again Peter errs. He goes overboard completely and wants a
bath from head to toe from Christ. He was going to miss the significance
of the ritual.

11. This ritual was significant in its procedure; it was just the
footwashing that was important as a representation of something that was
about to occur.

12. The bath would be a representation of salvation; the footwashing a
ritual about forgiveness after salvation.

13. Christ wants to highlight post-salvation forgiveness as a precursor
to the cross, so that His disciples will understand the necessity of
forgiving one another, and that the possibility of that comes from the
cross.

14. Indeed, this foot-washing has become a new hand-washing with a
twist.

The ritual of hand-washing had been around since the advent of the
tabernacle, at least.

At the entrance to the holy place, there stood a copper laver, where the
priests would wash their hands.

(1) The copper was highly polished, so that when the priests bent over
to wash their hands, they would see their own image there.

(2) This was intended to portray and even initiate self-examination.

(3) So this laver for hand-washing was a physical metaphor for the
confession of sin unto God.

This foot-washing of Christ’s is similar to an extent. It represents not
the vertical confession of hand washing, but rather the horizontal
confession of relationships between men.

Christ says that a bath is not necessary; this does not represent
salvation. Nor does it represent confession. Rather, it represents
forgiveness between men.

But note this detail.

(1) Christ washes His disciples feet to show that He has forgiven them.

(2) It was the reverse with the sinful woman of Luke chapter seven. She
washed Christ’s feet as a recognition of His atoning work.

(3) Christ wants His disciples to perpetuate this practice so that they
will forgive one another based on His work.

(4) But this right here represents forgiveness of post-salvation sin.
Post salvation sin was paid for on the cross, just as all pre-salvation
sin.

(5) The unlimited atonement extends to our Christian future as much it
extends backward to our non-Christian past.

(6) All of it must be forgiven, and that is the nature of unlimited
atonement.

(7) Judas is not a believer. Christ knows this. So Judas requires
something greater than just the basic forgiveness of Christian sin.

Verses Twelve through Seventeen: “(12) So when He had washed their feet,
and taken His garments and reclined at the table again, He said to them,
‘Do you know what I have done to you? (13) You call Me Teacher and Lord;
and you are right, for so I am. (14) If I then, the Lord and the
Teacher, washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another’s feet.
(15) For I gave you an example that you also should do as I did to you.
(16) Truly, truly, I say to you, a slave is not greater than his master,
nor is one who is sent greater than the one who went him. (17) If you
know these things, you are blessed if you do them.’”

Now finished with this ritual work, Christ settles in to explain.

He prompts them to think about what He has just done - He wants them to
think it through, and asking questions is a great way to do that.

Then Christ goes on to answer His own question, in a roundabout way. He
gets them to affirm His authority, and then to realize that He has led
them by example. If I did this to you, then you should do it for one
another.

Now you should all recognize that this ritual never really caught on
during apostolic times.

This brings us to a conclusion: that the disciples never understood the
ritual to be a command, but rather the reality behind the ritual as a
necessity.

And the reality is to forgive the sins of others, as Christ has already
forgiven them.

We now have this responsibility to imitate the underlying reality of the
ritual.

From time to time we have to wash the feet of other people. That is, we
have to come into contact with their dirt and grime that they pick up
from walking around in the devil’s world.

And it is our responsibility to wash that grime away. It is interesting
that the metaphor has us doing the cleaning. In reality, Christ has done
that completely through the cross.

But it is a good metaphor in that it has us participating in a dirty and
unpleasant job. No one wants to clean up after the sinful spree of
another. The fact of the matter is that the responsibility to do so
remains.

But listen: the sins of others are not yours to bear. Cleaning their
feet is a responsibility and a necessity because of the damage that may
result to you and to the relationship if you perpetuate a grudge.

Because Christ has already borne our sins on the cross, we do not have
to carry the debt of the sins of others. He has paid the price, and it
is not really our debt at all. The sooner the forgiveness is given, the
sooner we can be free from carrying the sin of another.

But of course there is a difficulty in this. What if the other person
will not admit their wrongdoing? What if they rationalize their
behavior, and justify it before you. How then can you forgive?

First, you must always be ready to forgive, as God is ready to forgive
every unbeliever. You can do so because Christ has already died for
those sins. Your readiness should never grow stale for that very reason.

Second, you must always keep the line of communication open - you should
always be able to greet them with a clear conscience so that the issue
of their sin may not remain a stumbling block.

Third, you must continue to pray for them, especially since this will
prevent you from entering into judgment about the situation.

Fourth, the maintenance of your spiritual momentum is the only
vindication you will ever need. Do not be self-righteous or haughty
about this, but listen… this refutes any accusation that might be made
against your character. Have the confidence of being right before God,
and you will not worry at all about the other side.

These things all add up to washing someone else’s feet. And it is dirty
work, but if it results in the fulfillment of Romans 12:17-18, it is a
good work indeed. “(17) Never pay back evil for evil to anyone. Respect
what is right in the sight of all men. (18) If possible, so far as it
depends on you, be at peace with all men.”

IV. The Attitude of Christ toward the Pharisees.

Our Lord comes down hard on Simon and his friends around the table.

But always Christ concentrates their attention on the truth. He does not
let them get away with a single falsehood.

When you find yourself among the Pharisees of this time, you yourself do
the same.

And if necessary, defend the honor of others right in front of them.
There is nothing more effective than that.

The Pharisees of this world are almost always hypocrites, and that
hypocrisy is an easy thing to find and point out to them.

But you must never cast a blanket judgment over them. Christ was there
because He felt He could help them realize what was best for them. He
gave them a shot at repentance, even though they were terribly rude to
Him.

The Women’s Auxiliary
---------------------

The Women’s Auxiliary

The Translation, Luke 8:1-3: “(1) And it came about in the proper order
of things, and He kept on going around each city and village, preaching
and evangelizing the kingdom of God and the twelve with Him. (2) And
some women who had been healed from evil spirits and weaknesses, Maria,
the one called Magdalene, from who seven demons were cast out, (3) and
Joanna wife of Chouza steward of Herod and Susanna and many others, who
were continuously serving them from their own private means.”

I. The Exposition.

A. The first sentence is noteworthy in the Greek, because it employs the
adverb KATHEXES. It denotes a sequence of events in a logical and proper
order.

1. So whatever Luke is about to introduce here, it has a certain proper
order following from the incident with the sinful woman at the house of
Simon the Pharisee.

2. Since this passage has much to do with women, and the one preceding
does as well, we can conclude that the women’s auxiliary to the
disciples sprang from the interaction with the unnamed woman of Luke
seven.

3. The verb EGENETO is the aorist indicative of GINOMAI. This verb is
unique in that it portrays something coming into being.

a. It has the connotation of an appearance out of nowhere, or from no
discernible quarter.

b. It has the idea of the arrival of something truly new, whether just
in one locality, or totally new in the whole world.

c. The idea of a woman’s auxiliary was certainly nothing new, not even
in the ancient world.

d. But Luke wants us to know of its spontaneous uprising. One day there
was no auxiliary, and the next there was. It came about of its own
accord.

4. Well actually it came about due to the initiative of some fantastic
woman believers.

5. But the point is that Christ did not organize this; He did not form a
committee for the formation of a woman’s auxiliary.

6. One or several women took note of some of the logistical needs that
existed for Christ and His disciples, and they began to fill them.

7. This came about in the proper order of things because of Christ’s
treatment of the sinful woman. He not only treated her well, but He also
exalted her virtues in front of several Pharisees.

8. The Pharisees were the kind of men who used to thank God they were
not born women. They held women in no particular esteem, and often
mistreated them. In short, they were quite gender-prejudiced.

9. Now the women of Galilee had a champion, and His name was Jesus
Christ.

10. In particular note that the sinful women saw a logistical need for
Christ and deliberately went about taking care of that humble service of
washing His feet.




11. It must have been her example that inspired the other women to
participate.

12. Christ kept on going around to the cities and villages. This comes
from the imperfect indicative of DIODEUO. That imperfect tense describes
continuous past action.

13. Two participles put forth the nature of His travels:

a. He was preaching, KERUSSON, and evangelizing, EUAGGELIZOMENOS.

b. Specifically, He was preaching and evangelizing the kingdom of God.

c. These combine to tell us that he was doing the work of an itinerate
minister through these towns. He was evangelizing, so that some might
enter the kingdom of God; He was preaching, so that those who already
resided there might gain and be built up.

14. The twelve were with Him, ostensibly learning and helping with the
work.

B. In the next two verses, Luke names a few members of the women’s
auxiliary, and just what they were doing, and how: “(2) And some women
who had been healed from evil spirits and weaknesses, Maria, the one
called Magdelene, from who seven demons were cast out, (3) and Joanna
wife of Chouza steward of Herod and Susanna and many others, who were
continuously serving them from their own private means.”

1. Verse two begins with a general category of women - those who had
been healed from evil spirits and weaknesses.

a. The periphrastic construction reveals the radical healing work of
Christ.

(1) This here is the pluperfect periphrastic, which contains the
imperfect of the verb EIMI and the perfect tense of the participle
TETHERAPEUMENAI.

(2) This is a very strong way to emphasize perfective action. These
healings and exorcisms were done in a permanent fashion.

b. Two categories of women received healing: those with demons, and
those with weaknesses - probably physical weaknesses.

2. The first woman is Maria, the one called Magdelene. Christ had cast
seven demons from her.

a. This woman had endured much misery before she met Christ and
believed.

(1) She must have reached the pinnacle of unhappiness and addiction in
order to allow the demon possession.

(2) And the demon possession suppressed her own control, so that her
actions doubtless became worse.

(3) To those on the outside, she had most likely the appearance of
insanity; especially with so many different expressions of personality.

b. But one day she had the demons cast from her, and she believed, so
that they could not re-enter.

c. She must have wondered just what to do for this man who had done so
much for her, and now in a response of love, she reaches out to provide
logistics.

d. But she is much more than just a logistical auxiliary; she followed
Him even unto Jerusalem, into the great danger of the last week of His
life, Matthew 27:55.

e. And when Christ’s disciples had fled, Maria followed Christ to His
cross, Mark 15:40.

f. After He had died, she still did not think her service to Him was
complete, for she watched to see where He would be buried, Mark 15:47.

g. She was among the first to go to the tomb on resurrection day,
Matthew 28:1; Mark 16:1. And when she had seen the empty tomb, she ran
to tell Peter and John, John 20:2.

h. She returned to the tomb, and there she saw the risen Lord. Her
faithfulness was rewarded with this great distinction.

i. Then Christ commands her to go tell His disciples that He would
ascend into heaven. She said to them, “I have seen the Lord.” John
20:17.

3. Joanna wife of Chouza steward of Herod is the second; she comes from
a very distinguished family of servants - they were servants to Herod.

a. Now Joanna must indeed have been an outcast among the Jewish women of
her day, for Herod himself was greatly despised.

b. Therefore it is ironic that she should find the true Messiah and
follow Him. For while all the rest of the Jews were involved in
counterproductive political activism, she found the only way to have a
great effect.

c. She is a classic invisible hero - the mouse in the palace that no one
knows, and yet she has more impact than anyone.

d. And just how did the gospel get to this Joanna? Think. It is John the
Baptist who was imprisoned by Herod, and the messengers of John who had
gone back and forth to Christ. Somewhere in all of that she received the
gospel. Perhaps she had even heard the word from John himself.

e. And this Joanna would have been wealthy indeed.

f. And needless to say, she went from a horrid boss to the best boss in
history. It was a really good career move for her.

g. She was present when they laid the body of Christ in the tomb, Luke
23:55, and was thus among those who were bringing the spices for the
wrapping of the corpse, and told the disciples of the empty tomb, Luke
23:56-24:10.

4. The third mentioned by name is a certain Susanna.

a. She is not found elsewhere in the gospels, even though she was well
enough know at the time of Luke’s writing to simply mention her name and
have confidence that the readers would know of her.

b. Since she is not mentioned elsewhere, we can have just a little
conjecture. Her reputation as a good person must have continued beyond
the time of Christ’s life and into the church. Perhaps she was such a
solid ecclesiastical citizen that she was well known even thirty years
later.

5. Many other women were there, although they are not mentioned by name.

6. These and the many others were continuously serving Christ and the
disciples. The verb is DIEKONOUN. This is the imperfect tense from
DIAKONOO. It is from the noun form of this verb that we get our word for
deacon.

7. These women were serving as deacons - not in the church
ecclesiastical sense, but rather in the sense that this Joanna would be
familiar with as a steward of the house of Herod. They were continuously
taking care of the logistical details of Christ’s travelling band.

8. This they accomplished EK TON HUPARCHONTON AUTAIS.

a. This is translated, ‘from their own means.’

b. So these women did what they could from their own private savings and
resources of various kinds, so that the ministry could continue.

c. They found a legitimate niche in the ministry, and away they went.

Christ Casting Out Demons
-------------------------

Accusations about Christ’s Use of Authority to Cast out Demons

Matthew 12:22-37: “(22) Then a man, demonically blind and mute, was
brought to Him, and He healed him, so the mute spoke and saw. (23) And
all the crowds were thunderstruck and were saying, ‘This man is not the
son of David, is He?’ (24) And the Pharisees after hearing [this] said,
‘This man does not cast out the demons except by Beelzebub ruler of the
demons.’ (25) And after knowing their inward fuming He said to them,
‘Every kingdom after being divided against itself is laid waste and
every city or house after being divided against itself will not stand.
(26) And if Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself;
therefore how will his kingdom stand? (27) And if I by Beelzebub cast
out demons, by whom do your sons cast out? For this reason they will be
your judges. (28) But if by the Spirit of God I cast out the demons,
then the kingdom of God has come upon you. (29) Or how is someone able
to enter into the house of the strong man and steal his vessel unless
first he binds the strong man? And then he will plunder his house. (30)
The one who is not with Me is against Me, and the one who does not
gather with me scatters. (31) For this reason I say to you, every sin
and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the Holy
Spirit will not be forgiven. (32) And whoever says a word against the
Son of Man, it will be forgiven him; but whoever speaks against the Holy
Spirit, it will not be forgiven neither in this age nor in the one
coming. (33) Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the
tree bad and its fruit bad; for the tree is know from the fruit. (34)
Brood of vipers, how are you being evil able to speak good? For from the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. (35) The good man casts out
good from the good treasure, and the evil man casts out evil from the
evil treasure. (36) But I say to you that every useless word which men
speak they will pay back concerning the word of it in the day of
judgment; (37) for from your words you will be justified, and from your
words you will be condemned.”

Mark 3:20-30: “(20)And He came into a house; and the crowd came together
again, so that it is not possible for them to even eat bread. (21) And
after hearing they went out from His side to seize it [bread]. For they
were saying that it was amazing. (22) And the Scribes who came down from
Jerusalem were saying that He has Beelzebub and that He casts out demons
by the ruler of demons. (23) And summoning them He spoke to them in
parables, “How is Satan to cast out Satan?” (24) And if a kingdom is
divided against itself, that kingdom will not stand. (25) And if a house
is divided against itself, that house will not be able to stand. (26)
And if Satan strives against himself and is divided, he will not be able
to stand but he has an end. (27) But no one is able, entering into the
house of a strong man, to steal his vessels, unless first he binds the
strong man, and then he plunders his house. (28) Truly I say to you that
every sin will be forgiven the sons of men, and whatever blasphemies
they blaspheme; (29) but whoever might blaspheme unto the Holy Spirit,
he does not have forgiveness ever, but is guilty of eternal sin. (30)
Because they were saying, “He has an unclean spirit.”

Outline.

The setting, Mark 3:20.

The healing, Matthew 12:22.

The response of the crowd, Mark 3:21 and Matthew 12:23.

The response of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew 12:24 and Mark 3:22.

Christ’s reply, Matthew 12:25-32 and Mark 3:23-29.

Christ’s insight and summons, Matthew 12:25a and Mark 3:23a.

The parables of division, kingdom, city, and house, Matthew 12:25b-28
and Mark 3:23b-26.

The parables.

The conclusions.

The parable of the house of the strong man, Matthew 12:29 and Mark 3:27

The principle of enemyship, Matthew 12:30.

The blasphemy against the Holy Spirit, Matthew 12:31-32 and Mark
3:28-29.

The reason for Christ’s reply, Mark 3:30.

Principles of the spoken word, Matthew 12:32-37. (cf. Mute)

The tree and its fruit, v.33.

The abundance of the heart, v.34.

The treasury, v.35.

The day of judgement and the spoken word, v.36.

The explanation of the principle, v.37.

II. Exposition.

The Setting.

This incident occurred during Christ’s itinerant ministry in Galilee,
which is portrayed so well in Luke 8:1-3.

He is evangelizing and preaching the kingdom of God, the twelve going
around to the cities and villages with Him, and the women’s auxiliary
taking care of logistics.

In one of those villages, in a home, this took place.

Of course, crowds are following Him, hoping for a miracle, healing, or
exorcism - and a few hoping for more teaching on the kingdom.

And Christ comes to a house, and there the crowd gathers again. In fact
it becomes so crowded that they are not able to eat bread.

Literally, ‘It is not possible for them to eat bread.’

Mark portrays this with the dramatic present tense of the verb DUNAMAI.
By doing so, he draws his readers in, as though they were part of the
story, witnessing the events with him.

We would say something like, ‘They are packed into the house like
sardines.’

The healing, Matthew 12:22.

While Christ and the crowd occupy this house, a man who is demonically
blind and mute was brought to him.

Matthew employs the phrase DAIMONIZOMENOS TUPHLOS KAI KOPHOS.

(1) The participle DAIMONIZOMENOS acts just like an adjective here,
modifying TUPHLOS ‘blind’ and KOPHOS ‘mute.’

(2) So it wasn’t that the man was just blind and mute, but that he had
that affliction because he was demon possessed.

The demon who occupied his soul made it so that he could neither see nor
speak.

(1) Umm, it was not that the demon himself was blind and mute, but
rather that he caused the state.

(2) A disembodied spirit cannot suffer from afflictions which are
endemic to the corporeal realm.

(3) It is reasonable to note that demons may cause bodily afflictions
and illnesses. And it may even be that they can do so without possessing
the body.

In the ancient world the line of distinction between deaf and mute was
often blurred. There was very little done for those who could not hear,
and so impaired speech was the norm for the deaf.

Now Christ healed the man. ETHERAPEUSEN is the aorist indicative verb
here, giving a simple portrayal of a past action.

It does not say that Christ cast out the demon, but rather that He
healed the man.

This makes it seem like the man’s affliction was not a case of
possession, but rather of affliction.

So now there are three things that can happen to a person as result of
demon activity:

(1) They can receive demon affliction in the form of some physical
ailment.

(2) They can receive demon influence in the form of false doctrine.

(3) They can become demon possessed, and relinquish control of their
body to demonic control.

And Christ simply heals the man, so that the affliction is gone.

The response of the crowd, Mark 3:21 and Matthew 12:23.

A must be said here about the harmony of these two gospel accounts.

Mark portrays the crowd as hearing Christ; there is no reference at all
to a healing from a demonic affliction.

Matthew gives the reason for the crowd’s amazement and Mark does not.
That is why translators have found it difficult to translate Mark, and
they usually get it wrong.

It is only by harmonizing the two passages that Mark’s gospel becomes
easier to translate.

Mark sets it up this way: the crowd was packed into a house so that they
could not eat bread; after hearing [Christ] they went out to seize
bread, for they were so amazed.

The aorist participle AKOUSANTES demonstrates that the action of hearing
took place before the action of the main verb EXELTHON, ‘they went out.’
So first they heard or at least eyewitnesses the healing, and then they
left the house.

Now this is more than a little funny, because it represents the attitude
of the crowd toward Christ’s ministry.

The phrase HOI PAR’ AUTOU EXELTHON KRATESAI AUTON is often
mistranslated.

(1) You can see why. Mark gives a paucity of detail about the event;
only by looking at Matthew do we know what really happened in the house.

(2) Furthermore, he is somewhat ambiguous with his pronouns, so that it
is difficult to tell to what AUTOU and AUTON refer.

(3) The first part is a little easier, thanks to the preposition PARA.
This preposition is a people preposition - it generally denotes
proximity to a person. If Mark had wanted to portray departure from a
place, like a house, he would have more naturally employed EK.

(4) So it is ‘They went out from his side…’

(5) But the next part, KRATESAI AUTON encounters difficulty.

(a) The translation of the aorist infinitive verb is not so difficult;
it describes the intent of the crowd: ‘in order to seize.’ The aorist
tense portrays their immediate and urgent intent to seize something.

(b) The object of the verb is again a personal pronoun. Here is the
difficulty:

(c) The pronoun in the Greek will most often go back to the nearest
antecedent that matches in gender and number.

(d) This particular form may be either the masculine gender or the
neuter gender.

(e) If it is masculine, its antecedent is the first personal pronoun in
the sentence, AUTOU; if it is neuter, its antecedent is bread, and so
should be translated, ‘it.’

(6) Amusingly enough, they were packed in so tight they could not eat
bread, and when they had heard Christ, they could not wait to leave, so
anxious were they to eat.

(7) The aorist infinitive KRATESAI portrays this ravenous crowd with
perfection. KRATESAI means to overpower someone or something; the aorist
tense adds a sense of urgency to the action.

(8) So here is a Greek idiom on ravenous hunger; and the crowds are
ready to get food even if they have to kill it themselves.

Mark explains further, ELEGON GAR HOTI EXESTE.

(1) The translation is ‘For they were saying that it is amazing.

(2) The verb EXISTEMI is without a direct object, it is translated
‘amazed,’ or even ‘crazy.’

(3) Since the subject of the verb is not expressed apart from the verbal
form, it can be ‘he,’ ‘she,’ or ‘it.’ And the translator just has to
make us his mind which one it is.

(4) From the gospel of Matthew it is abundantly clear that the crowds
were amazed, and not Christ. Again the harmony saves us from ambiguity
and mistranslation.

(5) The conjunction GAR makes it clear that this is an explanation on
the behavior of the crowd in going out to seize the bread.

(6) The imperfect tense of the verb ELEGON depicts a continuous past
action - they kept on saying that ‘it is amazing.’

(7) So this is kind of the funny part: what they saw was so amazing that
they became famished and ravenously hungry.

(8) And this is certainly within the bounds of the common experience of
man; you go to see a great movie, an action movie, and you come out
hungry because the protagonist has been through so much, and it is a
vicarious experience for you.

(9) Perhaps this little passage give us more insight on what it was like
to be an eyewitness to the life of Christ. It was amazing. It would
knock your socks clean off. You would walk out of there ravenously
hungry, it was so great.

Matthew explains the response of the crowd a little differently.

He employs the same verb, EXISTEMI, to describe their mental and
emotional state.

(1) This verb means to stand outside oneself. It is equivalent of our
own ecstatic.

(2) They were knocked out - thunderstruck at what had occurred. Perhaps
many of the people knew this man who had been blind and mute. That would
certainly add to their amazement.

But Matthew concentrates not on their desire to eat bread; rather, on
what words they spoke about Christ.

Matthew uses a particle that expresses doubt - one that admits a very
small chance that something is true. It is the particle METI.

(1) It was the same particle employed by the Samaritan woman of John
chapter four, when she says to her fellow townspeople, ‘This man is not
the Messiah, is He?’

(2) So these people indicate that they see with their own eyes certain
miraculous acts that would point out Christ as the Son of David, that
is, the Messiah.

(3) But they just cannot believe that Christ is the man. He is not a
‘believable’ Messiah to them.

(4) Part of this believability factor was predicted in Isaiah 53:2: “He
has no stately form or majesty that we should look upon Him, Nor
appearance that we should be attracted to Him.

(5) As we would say, he just doesn’t look presidential, or messianic.

(6) Neither were His teachings what they expected. The teachings
disappointed, because they were not in line with their desires.

(7) So instead of saying, these miracles are amazing, Jesus has to be
the Messiah - they are saying He doesn’t look or teach like our idea of
the Messiah, so He cannot be.

The term Son of David comes from the Messianic prophecy that is the
Davidic covenant.

(1) The original citation of the covenant is in 2 Samuel 7:8-17; it is
reiterated in Psalm 89:19-37.

(2) The people of Israel would have known these passages well, but again
they are interpreting not according to objectivity, but according to
desire.

The response of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew 12:24 and Mark 3:22.

The Pharisees and Scribes had come down from Jerusalem in order to
‘check out’ Jesus.

They had their own interpretation of the event ready for the people to
digest. They were always telling the lesser people of the nation how to
think; always giving their ‘spin’ on what Christ was doing.

Since Christ has just been so hard on Simon the Pharisee, it stands to
reason that they would be in the vindictive mode, and looking to
discredit Him in a big way.

This outrageous lie is to say the worst about Christ.

According to Mark, they implicated Him as being demon-possessed by
Beelzebub, and for that reason he had the ability to cast out demons.

This name means “Lord of the heavenly dwelling.” He is an archon
mentioned by name in Matthew 10:25; 12:24-27; Mark 3:22; Luke 11:15-19.

This demon is an archon in heaven, and he is likely to be Satan’s
current lieutenant.

By getting the people to conclude that Christ is the personification of
evil, they hope that all ties to Him will be severed, and the people
will return to them as their source of truth.

For in that respect is power, and that is what the Pharisees truly
desire.

Christ’s reply, Matthew 12:25-32 and Mark 3:23-29.

Christ’s insight and summons, Matthew 12:25a and Mark 3:23a.

Christ knew the inward fuming of the Pharisees and Scribes.

(1) The aorist participle EIDOS communicates that Christ came to a firm
conclusion about the thinking of the legalistic Jewish leadership
present.

(2) ENTHUMEISES describes the inward mental and emotional state of the
Jewish leadership.

(a) This is an emotional word; the original word THUMEO described the
smoking of incense.

(b) This is the word that described Joseph’s inward fuming when he found
out that Mary was pregnant.

(c) It usually has the negative idea of slowly smoldering anger, but can
also give the depiction of the germination of an idea.

(d) Here of course it is the inward fuming of the Pharisees at Christ’s
success, and their scheming to destroy Him as well. Therefore the word
fits both ways.

(3) Christ knew their inward fuming. How did He know? Was it miraculous
in some way?

(a) Probably not here; the thoughts of the Pharisees were manifest in
their actions.

(b) So from their actions in maligning Christ, our Lord has come to a
conclusion about their inward thought life.

And as a result, He summoned them.

(1) Christ is again going to employ the parable to communicate truth.

(2) He does not do it in a demeaning or condescending or patronizing
way. It is the hope of Christ that He can turn their way of thinking.

(3) Notice especially that Christ summoned them and spoke to them
exclusively. He does not point out their error in front of the crowd.

(4) He is giving them every opportunity to listen to what He has to say,
so that they might respond and join Him in His kingdom.

(5) What in the world, Christ knows He is going to the cross for these
Pharisees just as much as He is going to die for anyone.

(6) So He gives them a great opportunity to believe, and the personal
parable is just the way to do that.

The parables of division, kingdom, city, and house, Matthew 12:25b-28
and Mark 3:23b-26.

The parables.

(1) First there comes a question: Satan is not able to cast out Satan,
is he?

(a) The question expects a no answer… it is a rhetorical question
designed to stimulate thought, so that the listeners will reach the same
conclusion as the speaker.

(b) If someone reaches that same conclusion by thought, then it is more
to their benefit. Again this is Christ giving his listeners every good
opportunity to believe.

(2) Then follow the illustrations.

(a) The kingdom divided against itself is laid waste. This is the nation
under the civil war.

(b) Every Jew would be familiar with this…

(c) In 1 Kings 11, there is the chronicle of the division of the nation
of Israel.

(d) Jeroboam had rebelled against Solomon because when he rebuilt the
Millo, a crucial kink in the armor of Jerusalem, the forced labor was
considered too hard.

(e) Solomon had observed that Jeroboam was an industrious type, and he
appointed him foreman over the work, but Jeroboam left.

(f) As he left he encountered the prophet Ahijah, who foretold of his
rule over the ten northern tribes.

(g) Israel had left Yahweh for the gods of Gentile nations, and part of
the discipline would be the division of the nation.

(h) The southern tribe of Judah would be left with Jerusalem as God’s
expression of faithfulness to the Davidic covenant, while the rest would
go with Jeroboam.

(i) There is also the promise of an enduring house like David’s if
Jeroboam and his division remained faithful. Solomon sought the life of
Jeroboam for his threat to the unified kingdom. Solomon died before he
succeeded in this endeavor.

(j) The twelfth chapter contains high drama. Rehoboam, the son of
Solomon, gathers the nation at Shechem for what he expects will be his
coronation.

(k) Here is a narrative of verses four through fifteen: the people
request of Rehoboam relief from their heavy labors in the reconstruction
of the Jerusalem wall; they make their service to him conditional -
relief or rebellion; Rehoboam tells them to return in three days, and in
the mean time takes counsel; the elders of the counsel take the
conciliatory view, and advise Rehoboam to settle with his people;
unfortunately, his fiery young peers take the opposite view and advise
the king to add weight to the already heavy yoke; he accepts their view
and answers harshly -

(l) “My father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you
with scorpions.” The word of the prophet Ahijah had been established.

(m) The response of the people of the ten northern tribes is equal to
the draconian measures of king Rehoboam. Verse sixteen says, “What
portion do we have in David? We have no inheritance in the son of Jesse;
To your tents, O Israel! Now look after your own house, David!”

(3) The second is the parable of the city - Christ simply communicates
that the same principle applies on a smaller model.

(4) The third is the parable of the house, and so the principle applies
at every level of size. Family, city, or kingdom cannot stand when
divided.

(a) The family divides at the parental level.

(b) Cities and nations divide for various reasons.

(5) These parables communicate the principle of unity.

(a) Unity of world view.

(b) Unity of mission.

(c) Unity of command.

The conclusions. “And if Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against
himself; therefore how will his kingdom stand? But if he strives against
himself, he has an end. And if I by Beelzebub cast out demons, by whom
do your sons cast out? For this reason they will be your judges. But if
by the Spirit of God I cast out the demons, then the kingdom of God has
come upon you.”

(1) Christ’s conclusion begins with Satan himself; here, the use of
Satan denotes his cosmic kingdom and any part of it.

(a) The general principles given apply in the cosmic system and kingdom;
they are universal principles.

(b) The satanic kingdom would destroy itself from infighting.

(c) Rather, the satanic kingdom is well-organized and unified. And it
wants to destroy your relationship with God.

(d) For if he strives against himself, he has an end, and any Jew with
first grade Jewish history would certainly know this fact.

(2) Furthermore, Christ turns the tables on the Jewish leaders.
Apparently, their sons were casting out demons.

(a) The reference to sons here probably is as simple as possible -
Christ means the Jews of that generation.

(b) But these sons also claimed to be casting out demons.

(c) You see, if Christ, the Messiah, the Son of God was casting out
demons using the authority of Beelzebub, then a lesser person would use
what or whom?

(d) The idea is that if Christ must use Beelzebub, then someone less
could hardly cast out a demon at all.

(3) Christ explains that their sons will judge them.

(a) The future tense verb ESONTAI makes it real clear that the judgment
is not now but future.

(b) In the biblical doctrine of judgments, there is only one future case
where human beings judge others, and that is the judgment of church age
believers in the millennium. During that period of time, church age
believers in resurrection bodies will rule together with Jesus Christ
over the human occupants of planet earth.

(c) But these sons of Pharisees do not fit that judgment well at all, so
this narrows our focus.

(d) It is not an eschatological judgment, but rather a judgment of a
more practical kind: their degeneracy will stand as a judgment over
their father’s beliefs.

(e) The generation to which Christ refers is the generation that will
engage in armed rebellion against Rome, and subsequently receive
destruction.

(f) Principle: your children will render judgment on your life; they
will either become a vindication or condemnation of everything that you
are as parents.

(g) And this generation of Pharisees and Scribes and common people were
terrible parents, because they had an awful philosophical foundation.

(4) Christ’s final principle is a sort of warning:

(a) If Christ does cast out demons by the Spirit of God, then the
kingdom of God has come upon them.

(b) Note the preservation of the doctrine of Kenosis - Christ casts out
demons not on His own authority, but on the authority of the Holy
Spirit.

(c) This is a Greek first class conditional sentence. It prompts the
reader or listener to assume the protasis for the sake of argument.

· The protasis is the first half of a conditional sentence - that half
which contains the word ‘if…’

· So Christ says “If by the Spirit of God I cast out the demons (and why
don’t you assume this is true for the sake of argument?).

(d) The apodosis contains the warning: ‘then the kingdom of God has come
upon you.’

· The apodosis is the second half of the condition, or the ‘then’
clause.

· Christ makes a logical conclusion - that exorcism by means of the
spirit of God is a sign of the kingdom.

· The exorcisms that Christ performed were for more than compassionate
reasons; they were kingdom signs.

- Christ is indeed demonstrating that He is the Son of David. There is
something that I failed to mention when we undertook the Messianic
potential of Christ previously in this passage.

- 1 Samuel 16:14-23 is the record of the only exorcism in the Old
Testament: “(14) Now the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an
evil spirit terrorized him. (15) Saul’s servants then said to him,
‘Behold now, and evil spirit from God is terrorizing you. (16) Let our
lord now command your servants who are before you. Let them seek a man
who is a skillful player on the harp; and it shall come about when the
evil spirit from God is on you, that he shall play the harp with his
hand, and you will be well.’ (17) So Saul said to his servants, ‘Provide
for me now a man who can play well and bring him to me.’ (18) The one of
the young men said, ‘Behold, I have seen son of Jesse the Bethlehemite
who is a skillful musician, a mighty man of valor, a warrior, one
prudent in speech, and a handsome man; and the Lord is with him.’ (19)
So Saul sent messengers to Jesse and said, ‘Send me your son David who
is with the flock.’ (20) Jesse took a donkey loaded with bread and a jug
of wine and a young goat, and sent them to Saul by David his son. (21)
Then David came to Saul and attended him; and Saul loved him greatly,
and he became his armor bearer. (22) Saul sent to Jesse, saying, ‘Let
David now stand before me, for he has found favor in my sight.’ (23) So
it came about whenever the evil spirit from God came to Saul, David
would take the harp and play it with his hand; and Saul would be
refreshed and be well, and the evil spirit would depart from him.”

- So David is the only Old Testament believer who exorcised demons, and
he did it by means of music and the Spirit of God.

- So Christ now reasons that if by the Spirit of God He is casting out
demons, then the kingdom must be upon them, and He Himself must be the
Son of David, the Messiah.

The parable of the house of the strong man, Matthew 12:29 and Mark 3:27

“Or how is someone able to enter into the house of the strong man and
steal his vessel unless first he binds the strong man? And then he will
plunder his house.”

This begins with the alternative conjunction E. This demonstrates that
this parable is intended as another explanation of why Christ could not
possibly be casting out demons by the authority of Beelzebub.

The interpretation of this parable is less obvious, so we should
identify the elements and try to match them to the situation at hand.

(1) The first element is TIS - ‘someone’ from the original Greek.

(2) The second element is OIKIA - the house.

(3) The third element is ISCHUROU, the strong man.

(4) And the fourth element is SKEUE, the vessel belonging to the strong
man. The clay vessel or jar in the house was where the valuables are
kept.

Now the ‘someone’ intends to EISELTHEIN, ‘enter’ the house of the strong
man, in order to HARPASAI, ‘steal.’ the vessel.

But it is necessary for that someone to DESE, to ‘bind’ the strong man
first, before he can perpetrate the theft.

Now let’s assign the elements.

(1) The house is the house of the human body, a receptacle for the soul.

(2) The strong man is the demon who occupies the house, possessing the
body of the individual.

(3) The theft of the valuables in the vessel is the recovery of the
man’s sight and hearing and speech - things precious to any soul.

(4) But first, Christ must bind the demon. And in order to bind a strong
man, you must be stronger than him.

And so here is the companion to the previous parable. If you are not a
demon, you at least must be stronger than a demon in order to cast one
out.

(1) The two parables work together so that it is quite lucid that Christ
is the Messiah.

(2) If Christ is not Beelzebub, or at least exorcising by means of
demonic authority, then indeed He must have some fantastic strength in
the spiritual realm, because demons are bad.

The principle of enemyship, Matthew 12:30. “The one who is not with me
is against Me, and the one who does not gather with me scatters.”

Christ now turns the tables on the Pharisees with this principle, and it
is kind of a scary deal.

This verse assumes the great spiritual strength of Christ, and of course
if indeed He is so strong, then you would naturally want Him on your
side.

But Christ turns the tables, because the Pharisees must understand a
principle if they are going to follow Him.

But if you are not with Christ, then you are His enemy. And if you are
the enemy of Christ, the one who has power over demons, then you just
might be in a heap of trouble!

Christ is not one that you want as an enemy at all. And yes, Christ does
put things in such tough terms.

Furthermore, if you are not on Christ’s team, gathering the flock into
the kingdom, then you are one who scatters. In other words, you are
working against God.

There is certainly no such thing as neutral ground in the angelic
conflict. There are no Switzerlands.

If you do nothing, then Christ is your enemy; if you do nothing, then
you are counterproductive to Christ’s aim.

Although the gathering and scattering have to do with the dispensation
of the kingdom, there are equal applications in this church age
dispensation as well.

(1) If you are not growing, you are regressing.

(2) If you are not producing, you are counter-producing.

This verse calls to mind another passage, Revelation 3:15-16, “(15) I
know your deeds, that you are neither cold nor hot; I wish that you were
cold or hot. (16) So because you are lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold,
I will vomit you out of My mouth.”

The lukewarm believer is the distracted believer:

(1) There are many distractions in life; none are worth the loss of
reward at the judgment seat of Christ.

(a) Revelation 3:11, “I am coming quickly; hold fast what you have, so
that no one will take your crown.”

(b) Romans 8:18, “For I consider that the sufferings of this present
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that is to be revealed
to us.”

(c) 2 Timothy 2:4-5, “(4) No soldier in active service entangles himself
in the affairs of everyday life, so that he may please the one who
enlisted him as a soldier. (5) Also if anyone competes as an athlete, he
does not win the prize unless he competes according to the rules.”

(d) Philippians 3:12-14, “(12) Not that I have already obtained it or
have already become perfect, but I press on so that I may lay hold of
that for which also I was laid hold of by Christ Jesus (13) Brethren, I
do not regard myself as having laid hold of it yet; but one thing I do:
forgetting what lies behind and reaching forward to what lies ahead,
(14) I press on toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God
in Christ Jesus.”

(e) Matthew 6:33, “But seek first the kingdom of God and His
righteousness, and all these things will be added unto you.”

(f) Deuteronomy 8:3, “…man does not live by bread alone, but man lives
by everything that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord.”

(2) Distractions in life may include the following:

(a) Society and recreation.

(b) Your children and their activities.

(c) Your employment.

(d) The lust pattern of your soul.

(e) Your past.

(f) Marital status.

(g) Monetary problems - too much and too little.

(h) Christian service. Christian service is easier to do than fulfill
the plan of God; it is often confused with the plan of God. Therefore
many believers become distracted with Christian service and crusader
arrogance.

(i) People tests, including:

· Hypersensitivity on your part and the part of others.

· Role model arrogance and iconoclastic arrogance.

· Rejection by others.

· Gossip.

· Unfair authority.

· Racism.

(j) The emotional complex of sins: fear, worry, hatred, guilt,
self-pity.

(k) Your health.

(3) Negative volition is the essence of distraction.

(a) You will often receive temptation to become distracted from the plan
of God.

(b) Distraction is one of two basic expressions of negative volition. It
is a basic form of dishonesty toward your spiritual needs.

(c) The fact of the matter is that you need the word of truth in your
life every day; you need to pray and apply doctrine to God every day.

(d) And very little else!!!

The blasphemy against the Holy Spirit, Matthew 12:31-32 and Mark
3:28-29. “For this reason I say to you, every sin and blasphemy will be
forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the Holy Spirit will not be
forgiven. And whoever says a word against the Son of Man, it will be
forgiven him; but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not be
forgiven neither in this age nor in the one coming.’”

If a sin is not forgiven, then that means eternal separation from God.
This is the ultimate of all serious matters. If a sin is not forgiven,
then that means eternity in the Lake of Fire.

And here in this passage we have the unforgivable sin.

The Pharisees in this incident are slandering a ministry of the Holy
Spirit; the exorcisms were accomplished solely by the power of the
Spirit.

Furthermore, the exorcisms were a part of the presentation of the
kingdom by Christ - they are evangelism signs.

This particular blasphemy against the Holy Spirit could only come during
the incarnation and the period of the kingdom offer; this is because the
kingdom signs were withdrawn after the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD

So slandering or blaspheming these works of the Spirit is in reality a
rejection of the common grace ministry of the Spirit. See the Doctrine
of Common Grace.

PASA HAMARTIA KAI BLASPHEMIA is quite comprehensive; the adjective is
universal.

The future passive indicative APHETHESETAI focuses on the judgment at
the Great White Throne, and the opening of the books of life and works.

(1) Every person’s name is written in the book of life; if they refuse
to believe in Christ throughout their lives it is erased.

(2) At this juncture, the book of works is opened, and they are judged
according to the works they substituted for the cross.

(3) The passive voice indicates that the subject of the verb receives
the action. So every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven, because every
last one was imputed to Christ on the cross, and He paid for them.

(4) Personal sin is not the issue in eternal salvation; how could God
condemn us for anything for which He has condemned His own Son? It would
be like saying that a previous judgment is null and void; it would be
like saying the work of Christ on the cross was not good enough.

(5) John 3:18,36, “(18) He who believes in Him is not judged; he who
does not believe has been judged already, because he has not believed in
the name of the only begotten Son of God… (36) He who believes in the
Son has eternal life; but he who does not obey the Son will not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on him.”

(6) Personal sin is a fellowship issue, but not a salvation issue. When
you commit a personal sin after you have believed in Christ, you get out
of fellowship with God; only by confession are you restored to
fellowship.

(7) Therefore only one sin can be judged at the Great White Throne; the
ultimate arrogance of the rejection of Christ’s work on the cross.

The second half of verse thirty-one tells of that one sin. The blasphemy
of the Spirit.

(1) BLASPHEMIA represent a slander or defamation of divine character.

(2) God the Holy Spirit had been giving Christ the power to cast out
demons. The Pharisees were saying that this had been accomplished by the
devil, or at least one of his lieutenants. So they were blaspheming
against the Spirit.

(3) Since this ministry of the Spirit was designed for evangelism,
defaming it was tantamount to the rejection of the gospel.

(4) Rejection of the Gospel is ultimate arrogance. It blasphemes the
precious price paid at the cross.

(5) But next is even more of an enigma.

“And whoever speaks against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him, but
whoever speaks against the Spirit of Holiness, it will not be forgiven
him, neither in this age, nor in the coming one.”

(1) Speaking, and we assume even blaspheming against the Son of Man is a
forgivable sin!?!

(2) But not against the Holy Spirit, not now, not ever.

(3) Now this does not mean that Christ is no longer the only way to
salvation; He is still the way, the truth, and the life.

(4) But notice the phrase ‘Son of Man.’ This is a messianic term, and it
has to do with the fact that Christ is indeed the Messiah.

(a) The Son of Man is a prophetic term, a reference to Christ’s
relationship with Adam.

(b) It occurs 107 times in the Old Testament, but only fourteen times
outside of Ezekiel. In those cases outside of Ezekiel, it is almost
universally an idiom for ‘human being’. But in one instance in Daniel,
it most certainly refers to Adam himself. The one time that it is used
in the singular in Daniel is 7:13, and this is the reference for the
popular term in New Testament times.

(c) Daniel 7:13-14, “I kept looking in the night visions, and behold,
with the clouds of heaven one like a Son of Adam was coming. And He came
up to the Ancient of Days and was presented before Him. And to Him was
given dominion, glory and a kingdom, that all the peoples, nations, and
men of every language might serve Him. His dominion is an everlasting
dominion which will not pass away; and His kingdom is one which will not
be destroyed.”

· The ’Ancient of Days is an Aramaic title that refers to God the Father
as judge of Jesus Christ. Daniel 7:7-22 is the only instance of this
title for God the Father. It concentrates on his eternal nature, and His
authority over the other two members of the Godhead.

· God would judge the sins of mankind in the Son of Adam on the cross.

· God gave two evaluations of His Son during the incarnation - ‘This is
my Son, whom I love, in whom I am well-pleased.’ Once at His baptism,
and once at the transfiguration.

· The picture presented in Daniel’s vision is the transfer of authority
from God the Father to Jesus Christ the Son. This transfer of authority
occurred in heaven most likely immediately before the incarnation. This
is something of a Christmas story from Daniel. It is a revelation of the
moments before the incarnation of Christ, the sad/glad going away
ceremony for the Son. From that moment forward God the Son would never
be the same. He would become the God man, and though His deity did not
change, His status did. This is the moment when Christ voluntarily
restricted the independent use of His divine attributes, and the
independent expression of His divine character. This moment was somewhat
akin to taking a military oath.

· The earthly transfer of authority took place at Christ’s baptism.

(d) The term ‘the Son of Man’ describes here Christ’s’ relationship to
the first man, Adam.

· Adam was the ruler of this world, but gave over his authority to Satan
when he sinned.

· So the millennial authority of Christ as King of kings and Lord of
Lords corresponds exactly to this.

· This is Messianic authority that concentrates on the ruling but not
atoning aspect of Jesus Christ.

· Christ as the last Adam would certainly atone for the sins of the
world, begun with Adam, but the concentration is still on authority.

· Although some would complain that the two are inseparable, Christ does
that very thing here.

(5) Now Christ has separated His role as the King of kings and Lord of
lords from His atoning death.

(6) He is in effect saying that there is no belief requirement related
to His kingship - whether over Israel or over the whole world.

(7) And this is entirely proper for one who concentrates first on
salvation, and that is the mission of Christ. Remember, He is
evangelizing people into His kingdom - that is His mission in the
context of this passage.

(8) Christ does not want to make an issue out of his status as the Son
of Man. He is certainly making an issue out of His status as the savior
of the world. And that is entirely appropriate.

(9) So here are the direct words of Christ that you certainly do not
have to accept Him as Lord in order to be saved.

(10) And this points out a strategy in evangelism.

(a) Once again our evangelism strategy must target issues that receive
the common grace ministry of God the Holy Spirit.

(b) Behavior is not an issue with reference to the gospel; belief is.

(c) To make behavioral change a part of the gospel is to stray from the
issue, which is the work of the cross vs. human works.

(d) The only repentance that comes at gospel hearing should have to do
with the work of Jesus Christ.

(e) Behavior is a post-salvation issue, and even a moral issue outside
of the realm of spirituality.

(f) But Christ died for our sinful behavior, so that it cannot possibly
be a criteria for salvation. Rather, one sin, the unforgivable sin, is
at issue.

The reason for Christ’s reply, Mark 3:30. “Because they were saying, ‘He
has an unclean spirit.’”

And Christ has formed this reply, including the parables and the
principles, as a response to the accusation that He has an unclean
spirit.

The imperfect tense of LEGO indicates that this was a repeated
accusation, and not just a single incident which occurred here.

The picture is that as Christ goes around performing miracles, healings,
and exorcisms, the Pharisees and Scribes follow Him, defaming these
validating acts from the Holy Spirit.

Christ comes with this reply especially because those words of
defamation affect the gospel.

Of course the personal and inner effect is the worst of all - it causes
the final judgment to the Lake of Fire.

Principles of the spoken word, Matthew 12:33-37. (cf. Mute) “‘Either
make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree bad and its
fruit bad; for the tree is known from the fruit. Brood of vipers, how
are you being evil able to speak good? For from the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks. The good man casts out good from the good
treasure, and the evil man casts out evil from the evil treasure. But I
say to you that every useless word which men speak they will pay back
concerning the word of it in the day of judgment; for from your words
you will be justified, and from your words you will be condemned.’”

The tree and its fruit, v.33.

This is a twist on the old proverb, ‘You will know the tree by its
fruit.’ This is more direct.

The aorist imperative command POIESATE demands that the listeners
implement this order immediately.

This denotes an ability to make the tree of your life good by means of
your free will. You can make your own tree good, so that it produces
good fruit.

So instead of an outside observation, this one gets inside the
individual life.

Let’s very briefly take up the analogy of the tree for spiritual life.

(1) By ‘making’ a tree good, everything comes down to where you plant
it.

(2) The tree of your spiritual life needs water, soil, and sun.

(3) But you see, YOU make this tree grow, YOU are responsible.

(a) So you must pick a good site with lots of sunshine.

(b) You must plant this tree in good and well-watered soil.

(4) The location of the tree is analogous to exposure to Bible doctrine.

(5) The fruit is made good by pruning and harvesting.

(a) God does the pruning through divine discipline, although we must
have a positive volitional response to that activity on the part of God.

(b) God makes the harvest as well, guiding us by the Spirit into
productive opportunities.

There are two kinds of fruit in the spiritual life:

(1) Your testimony in the angelic conflict;

(2) Your Christian service (see doctrine of Christian Service).

The abundance of the heart, v.34.

The phrase GENNEMATA ECHIDNON is especially abrasive. Brood or offspring
of vipers is certainly not intended as a complement.

(1) But this is not an idle remark, either. It has a certain accuracy to
it that goes beyond that ad hominem kind of retort.

(2) The ECHIDNA is a poisonous snake. Its venom can kill you. The
Scribes and Pharisees are the offspring of vipers.

(3) They are the offspring of vipers not in a reference to Satan, the
serpent and dragon of old, but in reference to the real vipers of the
world. Christ is making a metaphor, and that is it.

(4) So a viper is poisonous and can kill you; the poison of the Pharisee
is false doctrine, and it can kill you in the temporal and spiritual
sense.

Christ next points out an impossibility. That if you are evil, you are
not able to speak good.

(1) Two words stand in opposition to one another here: AGATHA and
PONEROI.

(a) The former represents good of an intrinsic kind, and in this context
even a good that can only be produced spiritually. Because it is related
to the spoken word, it is truth itself.

(b) The latter represents evil and falsehood.

(2) Christ comes right out and calls the Pharisees and Scribes evil. And
since they are evil, they have an inability to speak the truth.

The abundance of the heart is EK TOU PERISSEUMATOS TES KARDIAS.

(1) The heart or mind overflows into the mouth. What you say is simply
an expression of who you are.

(2) So the heart is like a spring of water welling up deep from
underground, and the mouth expresses itself like the outflow from that
spring. If the spring is alkaline, then the outflow will be nothing
less.

(3) If the spring is pure, sweet water, then the outflow will be
fantastic.

The treasury, v.35.

This verse stands as an explanation of the principle that Christ has
just given.

The good man casts out good from the good treasure; the evil man casts
out evil from the evil treasure.

(1) The Greek verb EKBALLEI is ‘cast out.’ It is meant as a paranomasia
or play on words by Christ.

(2) It is a synonym for exorcism. So that, if Christ is good, He
exorcises from good.

(3) This stands as a clever refutation of the Pharisees’ assertion of
Christ casting out demons by Beelzebub. It also doubles as a general
principle for all expression in life.

Again AGATHOS and PONEROS stand in opposition to one another, this time
with a triple dose. Christ draws distinct battle lines between Himself
and the Jewish legalists present.

The treasury of the heart is the sum total of information in the
mentality and conscience.

(1) See Matthew 6:19-21 exegesis, from the Life of Christ series.

(2) Proverbs 10:20, “The tongue of the righteous is as choice silver,
the heart of the wicked is cheap.”

(3) The conscience and mentality are filled with whatever you put there.
If you fill them with truth, then you will have a treasury of good
things.

(4) You are therefore defined as good if you fill your heart with good
things; this concentrates purely at the intake stage of spiritual
growth.

(5) And if you fill your heart with bad things, then you are bad.

And this view takes into account an encompassing view of your life and
especially of your intake.

(1) There are 23 hours in the day when you do not take in the truth;
what is the nature of that time?

(2) Is it spent in gossip? ‘Modern’ literature? Watching soap operas?
Listening to music that contains anything but virtue?

(3) That other 23 hours is a very important time, because it can
completely wash out what you are doing in the word.

(4) Your intake of the word can be overwhelmed by your intake of worldly
culture, and our current American culture is overwhelmingly unvirtuous.

(5) God the Holy Spirit then must make do with about a 24 to 1 ratio of
information, and that is the Custer battlefield of the soul.

(6) Where your treasure is, there will be your heart also.

The day of judgement and the spoken word, v.36. “But I say to you that
every useless word which men speak they will pay back concerning the
word of it in the day of judgment;”

ARGOS is ‘idle,’ ‘lazy,’ ‘unproductive,’ or ‘useless.’ This adjective
modifies RHEMA, the spoken word, or some issue which comes from the
spoken word.

Listen again to the third commandment: “you shall not take the name of
the Lord your God in vain, for the Lord will not leave him unpunished
who takes His name in vain.”

(1) It is quite apparent that Christ refers to this commandment when He
makes this proclamation; but we must exercise care, because it seems as
though there is an expansion of sorts on the prohibition.

(2) The commandment of Moses concentrates on the vain-spoken word to
God; here Christ employs the adjective of universality, PAN. It shows an
all-encompassing situation. It is ‘every useless word.’

(3) This begins to sound very much like the Sermon on the Mount, where
Christ set forth His establish code for His millennial rule.

(4) Generally speaking, Christ’s establishment code was much stricter
than that of Moses.

But wait a minute; the reference to the Day of Judgment undermines this
interpretation.

(1) There is no eternal judgment related to the establishment code; the
establishment code is for time only.

(2) Let’s go back to our context for a moment. The very next verse,
verse 37, relates this saying to salvation. It is indeed the last
judgment.

(3) So at the last judgment we will be justified on the basis of our
vain words.

(4) Now there is a connection between the third commandment and this
saying of Christ.

(5) The third commandment is the relationship with God commandment; it
says that when you use God’s name, it is to be in the context of a
relationship with Him.

(a) The very first time that you call upon God is when you respond to
the gospel.

(b) He then responds by causing you to be saved.

(6) So at the Great White Throne, the last judgment in history, Christ
judges the unbeliever on the basis of every vain word.

(a) This is an entirely just judgment, because anyone one of those words
could have been admission of total depravity and an expression of
reliance on His work.

(b) Go back to the second half of the commandment of Moses: “for the
Lord will not leave him unpunished who takes His name in vain.”

The explanation of the principle, v.37. “for from your words you will be
justified, and from your words you will be condemned.’”

There are two verbs in this verse which describe the two fates at the
final judgment:

(1) Justification - DIKAIOTHESE. This is the future passive indicative
of DIKAIOO.

(a) The future indicative portrays an action that is certain to happen.
There is a prophetic inevitability about this word.

(b) The passive voice makes it clear that the subject is the recipient
of the action, and he does not produce it on his own.

(c) Here that subject is multiple - it is every believer who will go
before the Great White Throne of Jesus Christ and receive salvation
judgment.

(d) By your words you will be justified; these words you speak to God…
“I believe in the work of Jesus Christ on the cross.”

(e) This brings about the veracity of God toward His word; at that very
moment He imputes the righteousness of His own Son to you, and on the
basis of that righteousness you are declared justified to spend eternity
with Him in heaven.

(2) Condemnation - KATADIKASTHESE. The future passive indicative of
KATADIKAZO.

(a) Again the future indicative predicts with certainty and
inevitability an event.

(b) And again the passive voice has God producing the action, and here
the unbeliever receiving it.

(c) Every unbeliever in history will receive this judgment; every single
one of his words will condemn him, because any one of them could have
been an expression of belief in the Son.

(d) The stubborn unbelief of this class of human being makes every
single one of their words in vain.

(e) Their words therefore come back to condemn them utterly; all of
their words - every expression of thought will come back to haunt them
before Jesus Christ at the final judgment.

(f) Every word will be considered vain and empty; every word useless
because of the yawning gulf of eternity in the Lake of Fire.

(3) Romans 10:5-13 is a part of this: “(5) For Moses writes that the man
who does the righteousness which is from the law will live by them. (6)
But the righteousness from faith thus says, ‘Do not say in your heart,
‘Who will ascend into heaven?’ (This works to bring Christ down); (7)
Or, ‘Who will descend into the abyss?’ (This works to bring Christ up
from the dead). (8) But what does it say? ‘The word (RHEMA) is near you
in your mouth and in your heart. This is the word (RHEMA) of faith which
we preach. (9) That if you confess with your mouth ‘Lord Jesus’ and
believe in your hear that God raised Him from the dead, you will be
saved. (10) For with the heart he believes unto righteousness, and with
the mouth he confesses unto salvation. (11) For the Scripture says,
‘Everyone who believes upon Him will not be put to shame. (12) For there
is no distinction between Jew and Greek, for the same Lord is over all,
wealth unto all who call upon Him. (13) For everyone who will call upon
the name of the Lord will be saved.”

The Demand For a Sign Refused
-----------------------------

Matthew 12:38-45.

(38) Then some of the Scribes and Pharisees answered Him saying,
‘Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.’ (39) But after formulating an
answer He said to them, ‘An evil and adulterous generation pursues a
sign, and no sign will be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the
prophet. (40) For just as Jonah was in the belly of the sea-monster
three days and three nights, so also the Son of Man will be in the heart
of the earth three days and three nights. (41) Ninevite men will stand
again in judgment against this generation and condemn it, because they
repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold something greater than
Jonah is here. (42) The Queen of the South will rise up in judgment
against this generation and condemn it, because she came from the end of
the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold something greater
than Solomon is here. (43) But whenever the unclean spirit comes out
from the man, it goes through waterless places seeking rest and it does
not find [it]. (44) Then he says, ‘I will return into my house from
which I came; and when he comes he finds [it] unoccupied, swept, and put
in order. (45) Then he goes and takes alongside with him seven other
spirits more wicked than himself and after entering they live there; and
the last state of that man becomes worst than the first. Thus it will be
also with this generation.’”

Outline.

The response of the Jewish rulers, v.38.

Christ’s reply, vv.39-45.

The general principle, v.39a.

The application and exception, v.39b-40.

The testimony of the Ninevites at their resurrection, v.41.

The testimony of the Queen of the South at her resurrection, v.42.

The illustration of the unclean spirit, vv.43-45.

The plight of the exorcised spirit, v.43.

The usual idea of the exorcised spirit, and his usual success, v.44.

The foul party of the unclean spirits, v.45a.

The point of comparison with the present generation, v.45b.

Exposition.

Verse 38: “Then some of the Scribes and Pharisees answered Him saying,
‘Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.’”

This passage is a continuation of the one we have just finished. It
contains the response of the Pharisees to the gospel call and statement
of impending judgment by Christ.

Christ says some harsh words toward the Pharisees and Scribes; not too
harsh, but appropriately harsh and difficult to swallow.

But Christ’s words also represent a dual purpose: to defend the
validating ministry of the Holy Spirit, and to also leave His enemies
with recourse to believe.

Although most immediate in the context is the statement of Matthew
12:36-37 concerning the vocalization of belief, the Pharisees seem to
aim their remarks at Christ’s discourse on the blasphemy against the
Holy Spirit contained in vv.31-32.

Again the Pharisees employ the appellation ‘Teacher,’ which is DIDASKALE
in the Greek.

You can see that these may well be some of the same Pharisees who were
at Simon’s house when the formerly sinful woman washed Christ’s feet
with her tears.

Remember, the Pharisees no longer regard Christ as the Messiah, nor do
they even regard Him as a prophet.

As a simple teacher of truth, Jesus would even be below them in their
hierarchy of authority and power. To them, Christ may be a teacher, but
He is less than a Pharisee or Scribe. The difference would be the same
as it is in our culture when we define the difference between a teacher
and a scholar.

Therefore DIDASKALE may be a term of respect under normal conditions,
but here it becomes demeaning.

With simple language some of the Pharisees and Scribes ask for a sign.

The present active indicative verb THELOMEN portrays a simple desire.

The complementary infinitive IDEIN tells us that they desired something
that they could see with their own eyes.

APO plus the genitive of source of the personal pronoun SOU makes it
clear that Christ must produce this sign from Himself.

SEMEION is the sign. Some sort of supernatural act, a miracle or healing
is in view.

These men cannot take Christ’s word for it; neither do they accept what
they have likely just witnessed - the exorcism of a demon. They have
discredited that very thing, so that Christ must now jump through
another hoop of theirs.

Verses Thirty Nine through Forty One: “(39) But after formulating an
answer He said to them, ‘An evil and adulterous generation pursues a
sign, and no sign will be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the
prophet. (40) For just as Jonah was in the belly of the sea-monster
three days and three nights, so also the Son of Man will be in the heart
of the earth three days and three nights. (41) Ninevite men will stand
again in judgment against this generation and condemn it, because they
repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold something greater than
Jonah is here.”

The aorist participle APOKRITHEIS depicts Christ thinking about what to
say. This never really portrays how long Christ thinks, only that He
does. Considering Christ’s great genius in the spiritual realm, it is
probably not too long at all.

Christ makes grave judgment against this generation of Jews.

They are evil, PONERA. The Greek word has pretty much all of the
connotation that ours does.

They are adulterous, MOIKALIS. This was a favorite description of Hosea
the prophet.

(1) Hosea 3:1, “Then the Lord said to me, ‘Go again, love a woman who is
loved by her husband, yet an adulteress, even as the Lord loves the sons
of Israel, though they turn to other gods and love raisin cakes.’”

(2) The children of the Northern kingdom had turned from Yahweh to
worship every kind of foreign god.

(3) They had turned to other gods like an adulterous woman turns to men
apart from her husband.

So evil might characterize the legalism of the Pharisees, while adultery
the idolatry of the lascivious types; neither were right.

PONERA and MOIKALIS represent two grave errors regarding spiritual life.
Both result in failure and harsh judgment for the Christian.

The verb EPIZETEO describes the action of the evil and adulterous
generation: it paints a picture of zealous and inordinate pursuit of
something illicit.

There are good things to seek in the spiritual life. To pursue the word
with zeal is considered a wonderful thing. Psalm 119:10, “With all my
heart I have sought You; do not let me wander from Your commandments.”

The evil and adulterous generation inordinately seeks a sign. Well this
group of Pharisees wanted Christ to do a sign right there before them,
even though just a little while before on that very same day he had
performed the sign of David, the exorcism of a demon.

And here is something that is no secret at all; someone who is honest
with his or her spiritual needs has no need of a sign at all.

(1) We have been living in the age of the invisible God for nearly two
thousand years now.

(2) Although there are many wonderful ways to come to an awareness of
God, and to see His wonderful works in our lives, there is no visible
God or visible supernatural act to cling to.

(3) Christ is offering the truth here, and an excellent way to recover
from sinful depravity and human misery.

(4) Basic honesty about your spiritual needs means:

(a) If you have never met God before, it means admitting your sinful
separation from God, and your helplessness to remedy that state. From
that point being honest means seeing Jesus Christ as the divine solution
to the problem of sin.

(b) If you are a Christian in a state of sin, it means removing yourself
from that state through repentance and confession.

(c) If you are a Christian struggling with the issues of life in the
devil’s world, or just wanting to identify your destiny, then it means
getting under the authority of a good pastor who can teach you about
those important things.

(5) In other words, you need Jesus Christ, you need a solution to
post-salvation sin, and you need the word of truth in your life.

The only sign given to the incarnation generation will be the sign of
Jonah the prophet.

Jonah was a prophet of eighth century Israel. Apart from his own book of
prophecy, he is mentioned only in 2 Kings 14:25: “He (Jeroboam II)
restored the border of Israel from the entrance of Hamath as far as the
Sea of the Arabah, according to the word of the Lord, the God of Israel,
which he spoke through his servant Jonah the son of Amittai, the
prophet, who was of Gath-hepher.”

(1) Since the minor prophet Jonah has the same father’s name as the one
mentioned in Kings, they are very likely the same man.

(2) Jeroboam II ruled the Northern kingdom Israel from about 793-753 BC.
His reign was an Indian summer, where Israel briefly ascended in power
and prosperity before their destruction in 722 BC

(3) Jonah’s only claim to fame aside from his evangelization of the
Assyrians was his prediction of the success of Jeroboam II in his
military campaign.

(4) Jonah had great difficulty in obeying the command of Yahweh; it is
not mentioned why he fled to Tarshish (Jonah 1:3), but from his response
at the end of his book, it is clear that he disdained the people of
Nineveh.

(5) Assyria was a second-rate world power at the time that Jonah went to
them and gave them the gospel in the middle of the 8th century, BC Their
glorious days under Tiglath-Pileser I and Shalmaneser I were gone. For
fifty or a hundred years, their empire had been experiencing military
defeat and domestic trouble.

(6) There had been limited contact between Israel and Assyria before
this time, but Assyria was a Gentile nation and certainly a military
threat.

(7) The Pharisees and Scribes of Christ’s time were throwbacks to Jonah.

(a) Jonah did not want to witness to the Assyrians because they were
Gentiles.

(b) Since the Jews were God’s chosen people, what would be the purpose
of bringing God’s good news to someone else?

Jonah is an intriguing choice of comparison by Christ, because he is an
appropriate illustration of the Pharisees, and he is a type of Christ in
the grave.

(1) Jonah’s reluctance to go to Nineveh is racial; he couldn’t be more
like the Jews of Christ’s day in that respect.

(2) Jonah’s brief tenure in the belly of the fish is a type or
foreshadow of Christ’s time in the grave.

(a) Again verse forty reads, “For just as Jonah was in the belly of the
sea-monster three days and three nights, so also the Son of Man will be
in the heart of the earth three days and three nights.”

· So Jonah was in the belly of the KETOS, sea-monster for three days.

· And Christ would be in the heart of the earth for three days.

(b) Listen to Jonah’s prayer from the belly of the fish (2:2-9), “(2) I
called out of my distress to the Lord, and He answered me. I cried for
help from the belly of Sheol; You heard my voice. (3) For You had cast
me into the deep, into the heart of the seas, and the current engulfed
me. All Your breakers and billows passed over me. (4) So I said, ‘I have
been expelled from your sight. Nevertheless I will look again toward
Your holy temple.’ (5) The waters closed over my life. The great deep
engulfed me, weeds were wrapped around my head. (6) I descended to the
roots of the mountains. The earth with its bars was around me forever,
but You have brought up my life from the pit, O Lord my God. (7) While I
was fainting away, I remembered the Lord, and my prayer came to you,
into Your holy temple. (8) Those who regard vain idols forsake their
faithfulness, (9) but I will sacrifice to you with the voice of
thanksgiving. That which I have vowed I will pay. Salvation is from the
Lord.”

· Jonah uses the language of death. When he went into the water, he was
cast into the abyss, the TEHOM or great deep of the sea.

· The doors of the sea close over him, and Jonah is lost for dead - he
has descended to the very roots of the mountains, in the pit.

· His cry from the deep was a cry from Sheol itself, so deep was he in
the ocean.

· Now Christ would actually die and go to Sheol while his body was in
the grave. There, He would preach to fallen angels about His victory on
planet earth, 1 Peter 3:19.

(3) On the basis of this great Psalm of Jonah, the fish vomits his body
up onto dry land, and he fulfills his mission as a prophet to Assyria.

(a) Assyria would then grow great under Tiglath-Pileser III, and come
down and conquer the Northern Kingdom.

(b) The ascension of Assyria is a spiritual ascension that result in
prosperity. They are employed by God as the fist of discipline on
Israel.

(c) The precarious position of the Northern Kingdom during Jonah’s time
was a parallel to the precariousness of Israel during Christ’s day.

(d) Because of Israel’s racist and arrogant attitude toward the
Gentiles, and because of their participation in idolatry, they had to be
destroyed. They were not only poor witnesses before God, but dangerous
to themselves and nations around them. God’s justice had to act.

(4) So as Christ says these words about a sign to Israel being the sign
of Jonah, they would understand it as a warning.

(a) But listen: one nation at least did repent during Jonah’s time - the
nation of Assyria.

(b) And it is the hope of Christ that the sign of Jonah will cause a
revival.

(c) Fascinating: that Christ is already identifying that it is going to
take a lot more than miracles and healings and exorcisms to bring Israel
to repentance.

(d) It will take the sign of Jonah, the greatest sign of all. Romans
1:4, “…(Jesus), who was declared the Son of god with power by the
resurrection from the dead, according to the Spirit of holiness, Jesus
Christ our Lord.”

(e) And even the sign of Jonah will not bring about the intended result,
due to the stubborn nature of the Jews of Christ’s generation.

Verse Forty One: “Ninevite men will stand again in judgment against this
generation and condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of
Jonah, and behold something greater than Jonah is here.”

Jonah was a reluctant prophet; this much is exceedingly obvious. Even on
his most successful day, he hates the repentance of the Gentile
Ninevites.

Jonah 4:1-4, “(1) But it (their repentance) greatly displeased Jonah and
he became angry. (2) He prayed to the Lord and said, ‘Please Lord, was
not this what I said while I was still in my own country? Therefore in
order to forestall this I fled to Tarshish, for I knew that You are a
gracious and compassionate God, slow to anger and abundant in
lovingkindness, and one who relents concerning calamity. (3) Therefore
now, O Lord, please take my life from me, for death is better to me than
life.’ (4) The Lord said, ‘Do you have good reason to be angry?’”

(1) Jonah actually preferred to die because he had converted Gentiles to
the plan of God.

(2) This really angered Jonah because since he was an eighth century
prophet to Israel, he had no converts there.

(3) With this attitude, the human side of Jonah’s efforts in Nineveh
must have been paltry at best. And yet it was it best work as measured
by response.

(4) But the Ninevite men will stand again in judgment against the
incarnation generation, because even as Gentiles they understood God’s
plan and repented.

(a) And for a hundred years’ time these Ninevite men supplanted Israel
as a client nation unto God.

(b) They would become proud and suffer the fifth cycle of discipline, as
predicted by the prophet Nahum.

(c) They will stand again: ANASTESONTAI. This is the resurrection verb
in the future indicative.

(d) At some future time the men of Nineveh will rise again in judgment
against the incarnation generation.

(e) The resurrection of Israel occurs at the end of the millennium, when
all Jewish believers are resurrected unto judgment, along with many
others.

(f) There before the Great White Throne will be arrayed all the people
of the world.

· Old Testament Gentile believers will be there.

· Unbelievers from the incarnation generation will be there.

· And the Assyrian believers of Jonah’s time will stand again, looking
proudly toward their savior Jesus Christ.

(5) And think about what Jesus Christ gave them.

(a) He gave them his entire self, trying every day to initiate their
salvation.

(b) He had the filling of the Holy Spirit, by which He performed
miracles and healings and exorcisms.

(c) He had an incredible amount of doctrine and wisdom in His soul, so
that He was fully prepared for every legitimate question and even
illegitimate attacks.

(d) And He would die and stay in the belly of the earth for three days -
but after three days He would rise again in complete victory over death.

(e) These all were so compelling.

Now we are analogous to the Ninevites; we have hardly anything at all to
go on in the way of miracles.

(1) Christ is not present before us.

(2) The temporary spiritual gifts have passed away, leaving only the
charlatans and their deceived ones. No one has the power to perform
miracles or healings or exorcisms during this period of the church age.

(3) According to the true doctrine of the imminence of the rapture there
is no prophecy fulfilled in the church age. Furthermore, any
tribulational prophecy must be able to be fulfilled at any time, so that
none of it can be linked to technology. It is no more valid to link
information from Revelation to our time than to the Middle Ages.

(4) So during this dispensation of the invisible God, it is more
difficult to settle on the one true God.

(5) The great way to see the supernatural power of God is by changing
your life, truly changing your life by the intake and application of
Bible Truth.

(6) So if we repent it is a powerful argument for the greatness of God,
because we are like the Ninevites, living in a very degenerate society,
and yet seeing an honest need for a relationship with God.

(7) What a powerful witness our repentance then becomes! Without
miracles, without much evidence of the supernatural, only on the merit
of the truth of God do we repent. How great the glory to God.

The Witness of the Queen of the South on Judgment Day, v.42: “The Queen
of the South will rise up in judgment against this generation and
condemn it, because she came from the end of the earth to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, and behold something greater than Solomon is here.”

1 Kings 10:1-10, “(1) Now when the queen of Sheba heard about the fame
of Solomon concerning the name of the Lord, she came to test him with
difficult questions. (2) So she came to Jerusalem with a very large
retinue, with camels carrying spices and very much gold and precious
stones. When she came to Solomon, she spoke with him about all that was
in her heart. (3) Solomon answered all her questions; nothing was hidden
from the king which he did not explain to her. (4) When the queen of
Sheba perceived all the wisdom of Solomon, the house that he had built,
(5) the food of his table, the seating of his servants, the attendance
of his waiters and their attire, his cupbearers, and his stairway by
which he went up to the house of the Lord, there was no more spirit in
her. (6) Then she said to the king, ‘It was a true report which I heard
in my own land about your words and your wisdom. (7) Nevertheless I did
not believe the reports, until I came and my eyes had seen it. And
behold, the half was not told me. You exceed in wisdom and prosperity
the report which I heard. (8) How blessed are your men, how blessed are
these your servants who stand before you continually and hear your
wisdom. (9) Blessed be the Lord your God who delighted in you to set you
on the throne of Israel; because the Lord loved Israel forever,
therefore He made you king, to do justice and righteousness.’ (10) She
gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and a very great
amount of spices and precious stones. Never again did such abundance of
spices come in as that which the queen of Sheba gave King Solomon.”

2 Chronicles 9:12, “King Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her
desire which she requested besides a return for what she had brought to
the king. Then she turned and went to her own land with her servants.”

The queen of Sheba was from a Gentile nation; she was indeed a Gentile,
and this is important in understanding Christ’s reference.

Whereas Jonah is a good example of a very weak witness, as you can see,
Solomon is an ideal example of a very strong witness. Listen again to
verses 3-5, “(3) Solomon answered all her questions; nothing was hidden
from the king which he did not explain to her. (4) When the queen of
Sheba perceived all the wisdom of Solomon, the house that he had built,
(5) the food of his table, the seating of his servants, the attendance
of his waiters and their attire, his cupbearers, and his stairway by
which he went up to the house of the Lord, there was no more spirit in
her.”

Solomon answered all of her questions, which are described as difficult.

Furthermore, she got to see his house, and the conduct of his household
servants, and even the way that he treated them.

There were no flaws whatsoever in the witness of Solomon. He has Israel
functioning as intended by God - they are truly a light unto all the
nations of the world.

And going to the strong witness, even the strongest witness in the
history of Israel, Christ is considered even stronger.

Verses Forty-Three to Forty-Five: “(43) But whenever the unclean spirit
comes out from the man, it goes through waterless places seeking rest
and it does not find [it]. (44) Then he says, ‘I will return into my
house from which I came; and when he comes he finds [it] unoccupied,
swept, and put in order. (45) Then he goes and takes alongside with him
seven other spirits more wicked than himself and after entering they
live there; and the last state of that man becomes worst than the first.
Thus it will be also with this generation.’”

Now this is intended as an illustration. These are general truths about
the actions and attitudes of demons.

Christ is the greatest expert on demonology ever, combining Old
Testament doctrine and personal experience.

But this is an illustration that describes the mental attitude of the
incarnation generation. They are quite negative to the teaching of Jesus
Christ, and exceedingly dishonest about their spiritual needs.

Observe that the parallel is between the unclean spirit and the person
of Christ’s generation. They are considered the same according to a
certain mode of behavior.

Verse 43 begins with the word HOTAN, which is translated ‘whenever.’ The
‘ever’ part of it makes it an open case. It is something that is always
true as long as the conditions are met.

The aorist subjunctive verb EXELTHE is a gnomic aorist, that states a
general truth or axiom. It is what is always true. It means to ‘exit,’
or ‘go out.’ This is most likely after the demon has been cast out.

Considering the context has to do with exorcism this is especially
likely.

So the demon goes out from the man.

AKATHARTON PNEUMA is unclean spirit. This has a kind of interesting
Jewish twist on the old fallen angel idea.

Any person that touched a carcass was considered unclean, and apart from
the fellowship of Israel under certain purification rituals were
undertaken. See Leviticus chapters 11, 15, 22.

Nor could a Jew come into physical contact with a leper and remain
clean.

There are various other regulations concerning unclean things and
people. Most of the time uncleanness has to do with physical death.
Perhaps the best definition of an unclean animal is that it is a
scavenger or comes into contact with carcasses.

The important point is that uncleanness had to do with fellowship. It
represents temporary spiritual death, and therefore cannot be tolerated.

Therefore, the unclean spirit is the angelic being who is apart from
fellowship with God, and is in a state of spiritual death.

Uncleanness is also associated with idols and demon worship in Zechariah
13:2, “And on that day, says the LORD of hosts, I will cut off the names
of the idols from the land, so that they shall be remembered no more;
and also I will remove from the land the prophets and the unclean
spirit.”

The way that Christ says this makes a connection with His Jewish
readers. And He interprets the doctrine of uncleanness in just the right
way, something that His opponents seldom if ever did.

Although the Scribes and Pharisees understood the legalistic function of
the purifications, they had little if any clue to the spiritual
significance.

So now the fallen angel - unclean spirit goes out from the man. And
whenever it does it experiences the same experience.

It goes through waterless places.

(1) DIERCHETAI means to pass through. This is the present of general
truth portraying what always happens when a demon is cast out from a
man.

(2) ANUDRON TOPON - waterless places. Now this becomes an interesting
description indeed. This is more of a general description of the passage
of the unclean spirit through places where there is no satisfaction. It
portrays the experience of crossing a desert and being thirsty and
having no water at all.

Seeking rest and does not find it.

(1) The present active participle ZETOUN is contemporaneous with the
main verb. So while passing through waterless places, the unclean spirit
is seeking something.

(2) The object of the participle is ANAPAUSIN. This means to rest or
stop with a special iterative sense of ‘again.’ So it is looking for a
rest stop similar to the one it has just had.

(3) Make no mistake; this unclean spirit is desperately seeking another
body to inhabit.

(4) The unclean spirit is after all a spirit, and therefore it no longer
has its angelic body. It has long ago ‘died’ in the angelic sense of
having body and soul separated.

(5) For that reason, it is completely deprived of sensory perception,
and it lusts for that very thing.

(6) It really is kind of a creepy portrayal; the spirit looking and
lusting for the sensual experience of inhabiting a human body.

(7) But this particular unclean spirit does not find another body to
inhabit, so it must return to the place from whence it came.

Verse 44 contains the soliloquy of the demon:

At the point where the unclean spirit can find no other home for
himself, he says to himself… TOTE LEGEI.

The verb EPISTREPHO portrays a return to a place that has previously
been visited.

He decides to return to the house from where he came out [EIS TON OIKON
MOU HOTHEN EXELTHON]

(1) He calls it ‘my house’, which is the noun OIKON plus the personal
pronoun in the possessive genitive, ‘my.’

(2) Of course it isn’t his house in the true sense, but it was given to
him. That is the nature of demon possession. The demon possesses the
house of the human body because he is willingly given control of it by
someone.

(3) See the doctrine of demon possession.

(4) So he returns to his house from whence he came out.

The aorist active participle ELTHON portrays an action that occurs
before the main verb. So first he comes, and then he finds.

The present active indicative of HEURISKEI denotes a simple act of
finding - it concentrates on the very moment that the demon re-enters
the house of someone’s body. Of course this unbeliever human being must
have re-invited that demon in order for him to receive permission to do
so.

(1) Well the demon finds the house in perfect order - it is clean and
swept and organized.

(2) The body has recovered from his last ravages and his last party.
Perhaps the person has recovered from the chemical addiction; perhaps he
has ceased the sexual addiction that includes abuse. Perhaps he has gone
on a diet from the gluttony.

(3) But regardless the body is in good shape once again, and therefore
very well set-up for another round of desperate sensuality.

10. The forty fifth verse concentrates on the degeneration of the
situation.

Before entering the old house again, the unclean spirit goes to wherever
the other disembodied spirits hang out. Most likely in Sheol, at
Torments.

(1) This is the compartment under the abyss that contains the souls of
unbelievers from all of human history. Job 26:5 “The departed spirits
tremble under the waters and their inhabitants.”

(a) The waters here refers to the surface ocean. Their inhabitants are
the sea creatures.

(b) The departed spirits tremble under here.

(2) This place is mentioned in Isaiah 50:11 - ‘You will lie down in
torment.’

(3) Luke 16 contains a true story about a man who lived there.

(4) Some the rebels of Korah were swallowed up alive by the earth, and
were the only ones ever to arrive alive at this place, Num 16:30ff.

(5) David was confident that he would not live in torments after his
death, Psalm 16:10.

(6) The resurrection removes the power of Sheol, or physical death,
Hosea 13:14.

(7) These unbelievers await the final judgement of the great white
throne. They are those who reside in ‘Hades’ per Rev 20:13. Death is a
reference to the living who reside on planet earth.

But nevertheless the unclean spirit goes and takes alongside himself
seven other evil spirits.

(1) The verb PARALAMBANEI portrays the taking alongside. It is a kind of
chummy verb, where there is companionship. The pronoun HEAUTOU ‘himself’
emphasizes that very thing again.

(2) The idea is a kind of thing where the one unclean spirit says to
others ‘Hey guys I found a fantastic body, come on along with me, and
we’ll have a blast.’

(3) But of course they do not have the man’s best interests at heart.

And so after entering they all eight reside there. And the last state of
the man becomes worse than the first.

(1) Well this should be obvious; whereas before there was only one, now
there are eight.

(2) And eight having a riot in one man’s body is a great riot indeed.
Eight desperate angelic souls seeking to have sensual experiences of
various kinds - eating, sex, art, drama, exercise, sunning, music, and
much more, I am sure.

(3) Do the demons decide by democracy what they will do next? Of course
not. Do they obey one master? No. They all try to do it at once, so that
the poor fool who has let them in is now considered quite insane.

11. “So also will it be with this evil generation.”

The comparative adverb HOUTOS draws a line of comparison between the
twice-possessed man and the current generation in Israel.

The future indicative of the verb EIMI points to a certain future
reality for the evil generation.

So they are like a man who is demon possessed, and then relieved of his
burden because the demon is cast out.

During the time between possessions, the man has an opportunity to stay
demon-free forever through accepting Christ as his savior.

But instead of that, he decides to get into shape, and to undergo some
kind of regimen of self-improvement, all of which is complete folly.

Self-improvement within the confines of the cosmic system does not
improve anything, and in the end you are worse off than when you
started.

If ever there was a perfect example of this it would be psychotherapy.
There is nothing wrong with the renovation of the soul under the
principle of divine grace. There is everything wrong with it under human
power and philosophy.

But there are many other things that fall under this umbrella as well.
Exercise and diet are cosmic forms of self-improvement when devoid of
proper motivation. The apostle Paul was an advocate of exercise, but not
for some foul reason of self-improvement. He just wanted to be in good
shape so that he could study more.

Makeovers motivated by vanity or adultery are an evil form of
self-improvement.

But all of these forms of so-called self-improvement lead to greater
degeneracy. And even if it is not within the realm of demon-possession,
it is another cycle downward into the cosmic cesspool.

Even as a Christian you may make decisions from a position of weakness
and unhappiness; these kinds of decisions always result in greater
degeneracy and weakness.

If you make a decision that undermines your priorities, then it is going
to result in greater weakness; weakness always breeds weakness.

Col. Thieme has often said, the more you surrender to fear, the more
fear will have power over your life.

Well, let’s expand that; the more you surrender to unhappiness, the more
power unhappiness will have over your life.

The more you surrender to anger, the more power anger will have over
your life.

The more you surrender to lust, the more power lust will have over your
life.

And when each element of the cosmic lie gains power over your life, you
lose willpower, you lose happiness and you lose the greatest thing of
all: self-control through the operation of the power of God in your
life.

That self-control is fine evidence of the operating power of God.

So the generation that lived at the time of Christ is always looking for
happiness, and foolish enough to let the demons back in.

Jesus’ Mother and Brothers
--------------------------

Matthew 12:46-50

“(46) While He is still speaking to the crowd, behold His mother and His
brothers were standing outside seeking to speak to Him. (47) And someone
said to Him, ‘Behold your mother and your brothers stand outside seeking
to speak to you.’ (48) And after formulating an answer, He said to the
one speaking to Him, ‘Who is My mother and who are My brothers?’ (49)
And extending His hand upon His mother He said, ‘Behold my mother and my
brothers. (50) For whoever might do the will of My Father Who is in
heaven, He is my brother and sister and mother.’”

Mark 3:31-35

“(31) And His mother and His brothers came, and standing outside they
sent to Him calling Him. (32) And a crowd was sitting down around Him,
and they said to Him, ‘Behold your mother and your brothers are outside
seeking You.’ (33) And after formulating an answer He says to them, “Who
are my mother and brothers?’ (34) And looking around at those sitting
around Him in a circle, He says, ‘Behold, my mother and my brothers.
(35) Whoever does the will of God, this one is my brother and sister and
mother.’

Luke 8:19-21

“(19) And His mother and brothers appeared to His side and they were
unable to meet because of the crowd. (20) But he announced to Him, ‘Your
mother and Your brothers stand outside, wishing to see You. (21) After
formulating an answer He said to them, ‘My mother and my brothers: they
are hearing and doing the Word of God.’”

Exposition.

The historical record benefits in a few ways from a harmony. You can see
where it was the intent of the Holy Spirit to produce a version with
complete details, and indeed the task was done.

This little passage easily breaks down into two parts: the situation and
reply.

The situation is this: “While He was still speaking to the crowd, behold
His mother and His brothers were standing outside seeking to speak to
Him, and they were unable to meet because of the crowd. And the crowd
sat down around Him. His mother and brothers sent to Him, and someone
announced to Him, ‘Behold your mother and brothers are outside seeking
to speak to you.’”

This is a continuation of the last passage.

Christ went into a house, Mark 3:20.

Many people left, famished, Mark 3:21.

Christ debated with the Scribes and Pharisees over the nature of the
exorcism He had performed through the power of the Spirit.

And now He is still there in that same house.

While He is still speaking, telling the Scribes and Pharisees the
illustration of the demon-possessed man, Christ’s mother and His
brothers came up to the house.

But the crowd was around the house, and in the house, and so they were
quite unable to reach Him.

For what reason they wanted to see Him, it is not clear; but they have
traveled to see their most famous family member.

Perhaps just a friendly family visit.

Perhaps to see for themselves what miracles He was doing.

The crowd was sitting down around Him. You can see in a large room of
the house, Christ standing in the middle, and a crowd sitting down
around Him. Most are Scribes and Pharisees.

So His mother and brothers send to Him. A messenger comes into the house
from outside, and announces to Him, “Behold, your mother and brothers
are outside seeking to speak to you.’

The last reference to Christ’s family occurred in Luke 4:16-31, or so it
is assumed. In that passage, Christ returned to Nazareth and was
rejected. It was His hometown, and so He certainly would have seen His
family then. That was Autumn of 27 AD It is now likely mid to late 28
AD, so approximately a year has passed.

But Christ did indeed think about His mother. This is in evidence when
He heals the widow’s son at Nain, Luke 7:11-17.

Of course these people of Christ’s family are no slouches.

Mary is a really wonderful believer; of her we already have some
history.

Mark 6:3 names four brothers of Christ - James and Joses and Judas and
Simon.

John 7:1-13 portrays Jesus going to the feast of booths; this would be
about one year from the time of our own passage, because the feast of
booths is an October feast.

(1) Verse three of that chapter has Jesus’ brothers attempting to
persuade Him to do something against the will of God.

(2) Verse five comes out and says that not even His brothers were
believing in Him.

But Acts 1:14 has Mary and the brothers of Jesus praying together
immediately after the ascension.

And indeed it was appropriate for James the brother of Jesus to write
the very first book of the New Testament.

But at this time, it seems likely that Christ’s family shares the
unbelief of the town of Nazareth. Indeed Christ would say so in just a
few short weeks.

Mark 6:4, “And Jesus said to them, ‘A prophet is not without honor
except in his home town and among his own relatives and in his own
household.’

The reply is this: “And after formulating an answer He said to them,
‘Who is My mother, and who are my brothers? And looking around at those
sitting around Him in a circle while extending His hand upon His mother
He said, ‘Behold, My mother and my brothers. Whoever does the will of My
Father Who is in heaven, this one is my brother and sister and mother.
My mother and my brothers: they are hearing and doing the Word of God.’”

Christ thought about this; He formulated an answer. Even with so mundane
an event as a family visit.

But this was a difficult family visit, because they did not believe in
Him. It is quite possible within the context of Mark 6:4 that even His
own mother had strayed from belief in Him under the peer pressure of her
fellow townsmen and women.

Many of you may also come from families that do not believe; from having
spouses and children and parents and brothers and sisters who do not
believe as you do.

Our Lord confronted this same challenge in life.

(1) Indeed, Hebrews 2:17-18 says, “(17) Therefore, He had to be made
like His brethren in all things, so that He might become a merciful and
faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to propitiation for
the sins of the people. (18) For since He himself was tempted in that
which he has suffered, He is able to come to the aid of those who are
tempted.”

(2) Hebrews 4:15-16 follows up with this, “(15) For we do not have a
high priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but One who has
been tempted in all things as we are, yet without sin. (16) Therefore
let us draw near with confidence to the throne of grace, so that we may
receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need.”

Many people find that the unbelief of their families and loved ones is
one of the most heartbreaking challenges in life. Christ went through
this, and in the end, some at least remained faithful.

There are certain things that you can do to remain faithful to God and
give the best possible witness to your family.

(1) Fulfill God’s plan for your life by keeping your priorities
straight. An unbelieving family is one of the greatest distractions that
this life might offer.

(a) For Christ to see His brothers and maybe even His mother in an
unbelieving state must have been emotional and distracting for Him. He
did right by stating what He is about to state in our study.

(b) And you will at least receive vindication for your right priorities;
if not now, then certainly before the throne of grace in eternity.

(2) Pray for your family; ask God to intervene in their lives in dynamic
ways so that they understand His presence in their lives. And do not
give up in these prayers. The timing may not be right for years and
years.

(3) Remind yourself again and again that attitude is the greatest
argument.

(a) As a wife you must apply 1 Peter 3:1-6: “(1) Likewise, you women,
obey your own husbands, in order that also if any [of them] disobey the
word, through the conduct of their wives they might be won without a
word, (2) after observing in respect your pure behavior - (3) concerning
which: do not let your adornment be external, the braiding of hair and
the wearing of gold or wearing of clothes, (4) but [let it be] the
hidden person of the heart in the imperishable quality of a humble and
relaxing spirit, who is of great value in the presence of God. (5) For
so [it was] also when the holy women who hoped unto God were adorning
themselves by remaining under the authority of their own husbands - (6)
like Sarah submitted to Abraham, calling Him Lord, whose children you
become by doing good and not fearing a single fear.”

· You can easily perceive that Peter is preaching attitude.

· This is especially emphasized by the exhortation of verse one, ‘they
might be won without a word.’ This is Peter’s objective for husbands
through the Holy Spirit.

· Winning someone without saying a word is a fantastic accomplishment
indeed. It is done through observation; the man observes the pure
behavior of his wife, her inner beauty, and is convinced of the virtues
of the Christian way of life.

· So the woman’s inner beauty is that she has a humble and relaxing
spirit, that is, mental attitude. She is a great person for her husband
to be around.

(b) As a husband you must apply 1 Peter 3:7: “You husbands likewise,
live together [with your wives] according to a fact: pay honor as with a
female weaker vessel, so also with a fellow heir of the grace of life,
so that your prayers might not be hindered.”

· The husband’s winning attitude is described by Peter as paying honor.

· You believing husbands are to honor your wives (believing or
unbelieving) as the gift from God that she is.

· The woman is the first gift to man chronologically; she precedes even
Christ according to a time-reckoning.

· She is the second most important gift according to importance.
Therefore she is to be honored!

(c) As children you must apply Ephesians 6:1-3: “(1) Children, obey your
parents in the Lord, for this is right. (2) Honor your father and mother
(which is the first commandment with a promise), (3) so that it may be
well with you, and that you may live long on the earth.”

(d) As parents you must apply Ephesians 6:4: “Fathers, do not provoke
your children to anger, but bring them up in the discipline and
instruction of the Lord.”

(4) Look for the right time and the right words to speak, if the
opportunity should present itself.

(a) The Holy Spirit will guide you in what to say, according to what
truth you have accumulated and inculcated in your life.

(b) But whatever is spoken must stay within the guidelines of attitude!

Therefore Christ asks a question to get the ball rolling: “Who are my
mother and my brothers?”

This question is rhetorical by nature; Christ does not expect to hear an
answer from anyone in the crowd.

But you see, neither does Christ expect anyone to have an answer. It is
really the kind of question that is designed to stimulate thought. It is
designed so that the crowd will say, ‘Huh? Whaddya mean?’

When you ask a question that has no clear answer, and even would seem
like a really weird question, it catches the attention of the audience,
and makes them think about where you are going with the true answer.

Matthew 12:49 contains an important detail: Christ extended His hand
upon His mother. She at least has entered the room, if not His brothers
as well.

By performing this small gesture, our Lord includes Mary in the circle
of those who are spiritually nominated into His family.

But not his brothers. And the other passages about His brothers are not
good. They at least for now are not a part of His spiritual family. They
would certainly be later.

And then Christ opens up His family to a much wider interpretation - all
who do the will of His Father, all who hear the word of God and do it.

Look at how Christ interprets doing the will of God; it is hearing the
word of God and doing it.

Let’s turn to Romans 12 and see how the first two verses of this chapter
corroborate Christ’s take on the will of God.

This wider interpretation is interesting and inspiring.

(1) Christ communicates the principle that Spirit and truth are thicker
than blood.

(2) That our true and lasting and eternal family has to do with
spiritual matters.

(3) There is the family of all believers, and then there is even the
immediate family of mature believers.

(4) The writers of the New Testament stayed faithful to this definition,
and the ‘brethren’ became a designation for Christians. It was common
for believers of the first century to address one another as ‘brother’
and ‘sister.’

(5) Although the concept is often abused, and commonly comes across as
false and silly, at least the idea that we are spiritually related to
Christ should remain.

(a) And remember, this is not just about being a Christian; the will of
God covers so much more than that.

(b) The will of God has more to do with maturity than just simple belief
in Jesus Christ, although that has its part in God’s will, too.

(6) Understanding yourself as spiritually related to Christ should
create a sense of esprit de corps in you.

(a) It should stand as motivation to continue your momentum, since
spiritual momentum unto maturity is the real standard for being a
brother and sister of Christ’s.

(b) It should give you confidence, because Christ successfully
completely His battery of tests. He was the prototype, and His testing
was severe. If He did it, you can do it too.

(c) It should build up a sense of self-esteem inside of you.

Parables, An Introduction
-------------------------

Matthew 13:1-3a; Mark 4:1-2; Luke 8:4

Matthew 13:1-3a, “(1) At that time, Jesus, after leaving the house, was
sitting by the sea; (2) And many crowds were gathered to Him, so that
after embarking into a boat He sat down, and all the crowd had sat upon
the shore. (3) And He spoke many things to them in parables.

Mark 4:1-2, “(1) And He began to teach again beside the sea; and a large
crowd gathered to him, so that after embarking into a boat He sat on the
sea, and all the crowd was on the land next to the sea. (2) And He
taught them many things in parables and He said to them in His
teaching…”

Luke 8:4, “And when a large crowd was coming together and going around
to each city with Him, He said through a parable…”

Exposition.

The description is so simple that little commentary is necessary.

Even after the incident with the Pharisees over demon possession, and
their attempt to slander His ministry, Christ apparently has more crowds
than ever.

He is still in the region of the Sea of Galilee, and indeed this
incident takes place near the shore of that sea.

But there is a significant switch in teaching style here that deserves
comment. He begins to teach in parables.

A parable is a simple story used to illustrate a principle of doctrine.
It represents a simplification of that principle for the sake of
communication. As such, it is certainly a compromise.

A parable is a compromise because it increases the time allotted to
teach the doctrine; it focuses on a single principle within that
doctrine. It is not nearly as time efficient as teaching a number of
principles point by point.

A parable is a compromise because it is seldom a perfect fit. Analogies
always have their limits.

This is not the first time that Christ has employed parables, but He
does so somewhat sparingly.

It is apparent that Christ employs rhetoric all the time. “Rhetoric is
the art of oratory, especially the persuasive use of language to
influence the thoughts and actions of listeners.” - The American
Heritage Dictionary.

The parable may be a sub-category of rhetoric, but it is generally
‘dumbed down’ so that it is a device that can communicate to everyone.

And there is nothing wrong with such a strategy in evangelization and in
teaching Christian basics.

But in the pursuit of spiritual maturity, illustrating everything is
quite inefficient, and slows the advance of those who do not need the
illustrations in the first place.

You will observe that Christ employs the parable often, and it is
appropriate to His audience. But observe also how less common it is for
the writers of the epistles to do so. And Luke’s history in Acts has the
parable even less often.

The parable was a very popular mode of communication among the Jewish
scholars of Christ’s day.

Now in the modern science of homiletics, that is, the public speaking of
sermons, there is generally more emphasis on the parable than is
necessary.

There should be a strong emphasis on rhetoric and effective public
speaking.

But taking the time to illustrate every principle in every sermon almost
makes certain their immaturity.

Imagine forty minutes a week of Bible teaching, and perhaps fifteen or
twenty or more minutes of that in the illustration!

There is no possibility of producing a mature believer at such a slow
pace.

There is no possibility, because the intake from the cosmic system will
overwhelm such a pitiful effort.

Many people get emotional about illustrations, because illustrations
quite often are most effective when they play to the emotions. To remove
the emotional from a person’s life is a difficult and chancy surgery
indeed, and yet that surgery can be spiritual life-saving.

But Jesus Christ used the parable for those who had yet to establish a
spiritual autonomy.

But this would be the first time that Christ used the parable to teach
kingdom information. It represents a striking departure for Him, and a
recognition by Him that the people were not listening.

Parable of the Sower
--------------------

Matthew 13:3b-23

Mark 4:3-25

Luke 8:5-18.

The Outline.

The parable of the sower.

The seed on the road.

The seed on the rocks.

The seed on the thorns.

The seed on the good earth.

Christ’s repeated proclamation.

The interrogation concerning the parables.

The identity of the inquisitors.

The big question.

The answer:

Distinctions among souls and the necessity of parables for some.

The explanation of the consequences of rejection.

The prophecy of the negative volition of Israel.

The judgment of the disciples by Christ, they are categorized in the
worst way.

The blessing of sight and hearing for some.

The explanation of the parable:

The seed sown on the road.

The seed sown into the rocks.

The seed sown into the thorns.

The seed sown into good earth.

A general explanation concerning communication from God.

The consequences of hearing the word.

II. The Exposition.

The parable of the sower.

The seed on the road: “‘Behold, the sower went out to sow. And while he
is sowing some [seed] fell beside the road and was trampled, the birds
after coming devoured them.”

We are going to save the interpretation of this parable until the end,
where it receives clarity through the mind of Christ. Here, we will
concentrate on the image alone.

It begins with the verb IDOU, which aims to gain the attention of the
listeners. It is an imperative verb that means ‘Look.’

Now the sower goes out to sow. This is his profession, and this was a
common sight in Israel. Everyone knows what Christ is talking about. It
would be as though we said: “The gardener went out to mow.”

You will have to impute an ancient concept to this narrative: a man with
a bag or vessel of seed, walking along and casting the seed as he goes.

For the sake of efficiency, the seed is scattered by hand with no great
scientific precision.

It is not that this poor sower is particularly sloppy in what he does;
it was the practice to be inexact, and even sometimes to an extreme.

EN TO SPEIREIN, is ‘while sowing.’ It is like saying, right in the
middle of what he was doing… some seed fell on the road.

Luke adds the idea that the seed on the road gets trampled. An obvious
inclusion that was left out by the other two chroniclers of this speech.
We will see how trampling fits into the interpretation later.

But nonetheless the birds come and devour the seed.

(1) It is not just that the birds eat the seed; they devour it. The verb
KATEPHAGEN makes this description.

(2) The aorist tense of this verb fits the meaning very well. The tense
describes an action that occurs in a moment’s time. The bird fly onto
the road and devour the seed.

(3) The verb itself means to ‘eat down.’ It has in mind an eating
without the act of chewing. ‘Gobble down’ is a really good translation
of the concept.

(4) So the birds come and in a moment’s time the seed is gobbled down.

(5) And notice also the modern practice of the scavenger birds to eat
what is left on the road. The road is open, and with the eyesight of a
bird is a really easy place to find food. The birds know to come there
for that very reason.

The seed on the rocky places: “And other [seed] fell upon the rocky
places where it did not have much earth, and it sprouted for a short
time because it did not have depth or moisture. But after the rising of
the sun it was scorched and withered because it had no root.”

On the rocky places there is a different challenge for the seed. Here
there is OUK GEN POLLEN, ‘not much soil.’

The adverb EUTHEOS depicts the very temporary nature of this plant. It
is the adverb ‘immediately.’ But here it is really ‘for just a moment.’
Notice the cause of the action - it did not have much earth.

So the plant does not spring up quickly because it has so little soil;
rather it springs up for a very short time. Its span of life is brief
indeed.

Two accounts add reasons of a different kind; depth and moisture. Well
really it is this: the lack of soil does not allow the root to grow and
expand, so that there is an absence of moisture. The one results in the
other.

The rising of the sun scorches and then withers the new plant. It is
destroyed.

This happens every spring when I bring out all the flowers that I have
nursed along in my basement through the winter. After investing months
of work to produce seedlings, the sun hits them, and poof! They are gone
in a few hours’ time.

The seed in the thorns: “And others fell upon the thorns, and the thorns
came up and choked them.”

This is a little more straightforward, and all of the accounts are in
complete agreement as to the nature of the hazard.

The thorns choke the new plant; they steal its soil, they steal its
water, they steal its sun. Because it is a young plant, it cannot
compete.

“And still others fell upon the good earth and bore fruit, some a
hundred, some sixty, and some thirty.’”

But of course the sower is bound to hit the right soil eventually,
especially since that is his intent.

And the seed that falls on the good earth, the earth with the right
amount of sunlight, rich with nutrients and the right amount of water -
that seed is going to produce a healthy plant.

And the healthy plant always bears fruit.

Christ says that the plants produce varying amounts of fruit, but they
do indeed produce fruit.

Christ’s repeated proclamation: “And while saying these things, He was
calling out, ‘The one who has ears let him hear.”

At the same time that He is stating the parable, Christ is calling out.
This comes from Luke 8:8.

The present participle LEGON has its action occurring at the same time
as the main verb EPHONEI. So the saying and the calling out happen
simultaneously.

The content of Christ’s call is simple, ‘The one who has ears, let him
hear.’

(1) So if you are able to hear, then you are politely commanded to
listen.

(2) The polite command comes from AKOUETO; this is the Greek imperative
of entreaty.

(3) Christ is telling anyone within earshot that they really need to
hear this parable - that it is something of surpassing importance for
them.

The interrogation concerning the parables.

The identity of the inquisitors. “And when He became somewhat alone,
after the disciples came, those around Him and twelve interrogated him.”

Now isn’t this strange? Our Lord has finally found a way to get rid of
the crowds. He tells one parable, and He becomes somewhat alone.

Mark 4:10 contains the reference: KATA MONAS. This prepositional phrase
gives the idea that Christ has become somewhat alone; it is literally
‘according to alone,’ or ‘after the pattern of aloneness.’

Even the disciples have wandered off during this brief parable - nobody
at all thought it of surpassing profundity.

Remember that Christ has decided to employ the mode of communication
that was popular among the Pharisees of the day.

Indeed, He may have done this in response to their accusations about His
ministry. Because they accused Him of working from the authority of the
prince of demons, He then adopted their method of teaching.

And this in turn caused the crowds to filter away! It was as if Christ
had used tear gas instead of a parable!

Well, the smoke has cleared, and there are now just a few folks left;
and his disciples thought that the parable was a good intermission, and
so they went away too. But now they are back.

And they are said to interrogate Him; the participle EPEROTON comes from
Luke 8:9. It means to ‘question intensely.’

The big question. ‘For what reason do You speak to them in parables?’

Yep, here it is. The big profound question from the disciples and those
few who remained around Him.

And our understanding of this question should be tempered by the fact
that Jesus gave this parable and everyone seemed to go away.

This is not so much a question of curiosity as one of accusation. You
can perhaps see the scowls on their faces as they ask: “Why did you just
do that?”

And you see how hard it is for us to fathom this situation, because in a
historical irony, we are in love with parables. Since we love parables
so much (indeed, perhaps too much), it is difficult for us to see the
reason for the question.

But the disciples had a reason; they were now alone, and the crowds had
dispersed, and they wanted to know exactly why Christ had shifted to the
condescending teaching style of the Pharisees.

The Answer:

Distinctions among souls and the necessity of parables for some. “And
formulating an answer, He said to them, ‘Because has been given to you
to know the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens, but to those
outside it has not been given and so everything comes in parables.”

(1) Christ first formulates an answer; the aorist tense of the
participle APOKRITHEIS does this. It shows that He gives at least a
passing thought to the answer before He speaks it.

(2) The perfect passive indicative of the verb DIDOMI indicates a very
strong action on the part of God. Together with the dative of advantage
of the personal pronoun HUMIN, it is translated ‘to you it has been
given.’

(a) Now God is the one who produces this action; He has given the
disciples the ability to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven.

(b) The perfect tense shows that this is a past action with lasting
results. And this makes a great amount of sense, because anytime that
you can perceive the plan of God for your life, it is going to have a
wonderful result. So the perfect tense is important here.

(c) Now it is just to the disciples that this has been given… Well to
the disciples and anyone like them.

· It is not that Christ chose them to be disciples and so God gave them
some special perceptive ability.

· It is that because they chose to believe, God gave them certain
spiritual assets for the perception of the kingdom plan.

(d) A further clue about this perceptive ability is in the phrase ‘but
to those outside.’

· This must be those outside of the direct will of God - those who are
not believers, or, who if they are believers are also out of fellowship
from God.

· The idea of fellowship was not foreign at all to the Jews. It was a
part of their temple worship. If we could take a walk through the
tabernacle today, its symbolism of the plan of God for mankind would be
striking to those of us who understand it.

- The tabernacle is entered through a wide gate, 30 ft. across.
Immediately to the front as one enters is the copper altar, which,
together with its sacrifices, makes a striking depiction of salvation.

- Just 10 or 20 feet past this altar is the copper laver, which stands
at the entrance to a smaller tent. The copper altar is the portrayal of
confession, and it is necessary to confess one’s sins before going any
further in the plan of God.

- The smaller tent contains all of the elements which represent the
post-salvation plan of God. Only the Levitical priests were allowed in
this tent, and this in itself portrays an important observation on the
plan of God: that though many are saved, not very many of those continue
on in the plan of God.

- We have seen the word of God represented in the table of showbread. We
have seen the work of the Spirit depicted in the golden lampstand. We
have studied the portrayal of the works of righteousness in the incense
altar. All of these are the elements in the Holy place, which represent
the advance to spiritual maturity.

- The most holy place, or holy of holies and the holy place are
separated by a thick veil, which conceals the indwelling presence of the
Shekinah Glory. The most holy place is smaller still than the holy
place. In fact, only one man, the high priest, was allowed into the holy
of holies, and that man only once a year on the day of atonement. This
place alone is reserved for Jesus Christ. The veil which separates the
inner tent was split when Christ died on the cross, which was a sign to
the Jews of the suspension of the dispensation of Israel.

- The writer of Hebrews states that the body of Christ (His life and
death) forms a bridge into the most Holy Place, so that all might enter
the plan of God, and advance to maturity, Heb 10:20-21.

- The furniture in the Holy place is arranged so that it complements the
most holy place. All believers are a reflection of what Christ Himself
has accomplished. All believers depend on Him.

- Through the tabernacle the Jews had a wonderful portrayal of God’s
plan for their lives. This portrayal was a clear and accurate depiction
of God’s will for their lives. They were to come to know Him, and enjoy
a relation with Him through understanding the Symbology of the
tabernacle and its furniture. This Symbology was designed first and
foremost for them in their time. Even though we may look at these things
and know them even better because of our perspective through the
completed canon of Scripture, they had plenty of information to
understand and through it to know God and advance in His plan.

(e) Just to make this concept clear:

· People outside the plan of God have scar tissue on their souls.

· Because of this, they experience spiritual blindness; their repeated
cycles in the cosmic system blind them to spiritual truths from the
Bible.

· The cycle goes like this: they reject the person of God, and then they
reject His word; the rejection of God’s word demands a replacement, so
they accept the cosmic counterfeits and lies provided by the devil.

· People inside the plan of God have certain spiritual assets that help
them to perceive the spiritual information from God. The ministry of God
the Holy Spirit is an example.

· The parable is designed to penetrate the armor of the cosmic
counterfeits and lies.

(3) The reason for the parables is that some have at hand what they need
to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, while others do not.

(4) If you do not have what you need, then you need a parable.

The explanation of the consequences of rejection. “For whoever has, it
will be given to him, and he will have in abundance; but whoever does
not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.”

(1) Let’s begin by defining the haves and the have nots in this passage.

(a) The haves are those who have the spiritual assets related to the
perception and intake of the word.

(b) The have nots are those who reside outside of fellowship with God,
and are lacking what they need to process the word of God.

(2) The one who has will receive more, and in abundance. This is truly
the blessings which are received on account of the fulfillment of the
plan of God.

(a) Spiritual blessings, especially knowing God.

(b) Earthly blessings, like intellectual, business, professional,
romantic and many other categories of prosperity.

(c) Eternal blessings, a multitude of ways in which God can bless you
forever.

(3) The one who does not have will lose everything.

(a) The very fact that you are alive represents a fantastic opportunity
to fulfill God’s plan and experience the destiny that He has for you.

(b) And even greater opportunity exists for every believer in Jesus
Christ.

(c) At the moment you are saved, your blessings for eternity are placed
on reserve for you.

(d) If you fail to reach spiritual maturity, then you lose those
blessings. What you have is taken away from you.

(e) You can never lose your salvation.

The prophecy of the negative volition of Israel. “For this reason I
speak to them in parables, because seeing they do not see, and hearing
they do not hear nor do they understand, and for them the prophecy of
Isaiah is fulfilled, the one saying, ‘In listening, you hear and
definitely do not understand; and seeing you see and do not comprehend.
For the heart of the people has become dull, and with the ears they
barely hear, and they closed their eyes, otherwise they would see with
their eyes and hear with the ears and understand with the heart and
return and I would heal them.’”

(1) Christ begins by reiterating the reason for the parables. He talks
about those who have accumulated scar tissue on their hearts so that
they are spiritually blind and hard of hearing.

(2) So they actually listen to what Christ has to say; the sound waves
of His voice enter their ears, and their ears work; their eyes receive
the information from observing His miracles.

(3) But even with a great bombardment of information, they have no
comprehension of what it really mean. They do not understand at all that
this information could have a great impact on their lives.

(4) The quote comes from Isaiah 6:9-10.

(a) The translation of this passage is descriptive:

· In the first line there is a double negative OU ME, which is very
emphatic in the Greek. “Hearing you hear and definitely do not
understand.”

· The same applies in the second line. It is not like they are just not
paying attention; the malfunction goes much deeper than that. There is
in fact no understanding whatsoever, either through the hearing or the
seeing.

· The aorist tense verb EPACHUNTHE shows the past action of the heart of
the people becoming dull. But it is not in the perfect tense. This
indicates that the situation is not irreversible.

· Their hearing has become BAREOS, which is weighty, burdensome, or
difficult. It is such a burden to listen!

- These are the lazy thinkers - people who hate to listen to doctrine
because it requires work. And boy is the world ever full of these.

- And this lets us know immediately that thinking about truth really
does take work, and that God requires from us this work of thinking.

- This contains the aorist tense of AKOUO, ‘to hear.’ Again the aorist
tense simply notes a past fact, but does say that this is an
irreversible state. The grace of God is adequate to reverse this
laziness.

· Their eyes closed, EKAMMUSAN. The aorist tense once again.

- You close your eyes when you do not want to see something. Closing
your eyes is portrayed here as a voluntary action.

- People who do not want the truth close their eyes to it. Perhaps it
will hurt too much; perhaps they need the cover so that they can
participate in their favorite category of sin.

· And notice now the order of things in verse fifteen:

- See with your eyes or hear with your ears;

- Understand in your heart;

- Turn;

- God does the healing.

· Now this is the true pattern of grace.

- Academic understanding of a concept;

- Application wisdom of the same concept;

- Repentance, or changing of the mind;

- God responds in grace.

(b) The context of the quote comes from the commissioning of Isaiah.

(c) But it has some shadowy overtones for anyone who might be listening
closely and checking their Isaiah scrolls during the time of Christ.

(d) Go on to verses eleven and twelve in that sixth chapter of Isaiah,
and you will see what I mean: “(11) Then I said, ‘Lord, how long?’ And
he answered, ‘Until cities are devastated and without inhabitant, houses
are without people and the land is utterly desolate. (12) The Lord has
removed men far away, and the forsaken places are many in the midst of
the land.’”

(e) In other words, this is the commission of Isaiah that is to last
until the fifth cycle of discipline comes upon the southern kingdom of
Judah.

(f) And Christ adopts the commission of Isaiah for His own, and in the
same moment identifies His generation with Isaiah’s. Isaiah’s generation
was not a good generation at all.

(g) Isaiah 28:1-2 testifies to this: “(1) Woe to the proud crown of the
drunkards of Ephraim, and to the fading flower of its glorious beauty,
which is at the head of the fertile valley of those who are overcome
with wine! (2) Behold, the Lord has a strong and mighty agent; as a
storm of hail, a tempest of destruction, like a storm of mighty
overflowing waters, He has cast it down to the earth with His hand.”

(h) Or verses seven and eight of that same chapter: “(7) And these also
reel with wine and stagger from strong drink: the priest and the prophet
reel with strong drink, they are confused by wine, they stagger from
strong drink; they reel while having visions, they totter when rendering
judgment. (8) For all the tables are full of filthy vomit, without a
single clean place.”

(i) And in the end the northern kingdom of Ephraim was utterly
destroyed, and the southern kingdom of Judah nearly so.

(5) Your heart becomes dull through repeated cycles of cosmic
involvement:

(a) Rejection of God’s person, like denying that He is a loving or
omnipotent God.

(b) Rejection of God’s truth, which is a necessity after rejecting His
person.

(c) Substitution of counterfeits and lies, to fill the vacuum left by
rejecting the truth.

(d) The participation in the cycle of lust and unhappiness, leading to
the weakening and destruction of the will.

(e) Each cycle of cosmic involvement dulls the heart even further, so
that the condition worsens.

(f) It is most common for people in this category to identify that they
have ‘tried religion (or Christianity) and it did not work for them.’
This is the motto of the dull of heart.

(6) It is worthwhile to take notice of the objective, which is stated in
the end: “otherwise they would return and I would heal them.”

The judgment of the disciples by Christ, they are categorized in the
worst way. “And He says to them, ‘you do not understand this parable,
and how will you comprehend all the parables?’”

(1) This was a parable that was so easy to understand. Well, Christ
thought so. Notice that He did not interpret the parable the first time
around; He does not do so because He thinks it is elementary in
interpretation.

(2) But this was only the first of many parables. And if the disciples
do not understand this easy and obvious one, how will they ever
understand others which are potentially harder to understand?

(3) Furthermore, this is an entry-level parable; it is about
comprehension of spiritual truth in the kingdom of God. If you do not
have a grasp of grace perception mechanics, then it is moot to move on
to other things.

(a) The two tenses of the verbs in this sentence (in Mark 4:13) work
together to demonstrate the entry-level nature of this parable.

(b) The first verb is the perfect indicative OIDATE, which because of
its meaning is translated as a present tense - ‘You do not know…’ So
this is the present condition of the disciples’ comprehensive ability.

(c) The second is the future active indicative of GINOSKO. These two,
when taken together, show a necessary sequence. This parable must be
comprehended first before going on to the others.

(4) This represents a hard rebuke of the disciples.

The blessing of sight and hearing for some. “But blessed are your eyes
that see and your ears that hear. For truly I say to you that many
prophets and righteous men longed to see what you see and they did not
see, and to hear what you hear and did not hear.” (From Matthew
13:16-17)

(1) Here is a grand dispensational distinction; here is a great
advantage to those who live during the incarnation.

(2) The exclamatory adjective MAKARIOI proclaims a state of blessedness
on the eyes and ears of the incarnation generation.

(3) But the blessing is a counterpoint to Isaiah 6:9-10. It is only the
eyes that see and the ears that actually hear which are blessed. There
certainly must be perceptive comprehension in order the blessing to
come.

(4) This is really the nature of much if not all blessing in the plan of
God. Blessing requires comprehension.

(5) In order to receive your appropriate prosperity for time and
eternity, you must comprehend the plan of God in all of its elements.
You must have that impact comprehension that brings change to your life
and especially your mental attitude.

(6) The rationale is given is verse seventeen - many prophets and
righteous men longed to see what you see and they did not see, and to
hear what you hear and did not hear.

(a) Christ begins it with a formula: ‘Truly I say to you.’ The first
word is AMEN. The source for our English ‘Amen,’ the concluding word to
our prayers. He does this get their attention - to tell them that what
He is about to say is of transcending importance.

(b) This is an irony; for the prophets of the Old Testament did not see
Christ with their eyes - they had no opportunity to take it to the point
of impact comprehension.

(c) But they longed to see it. The verb is EPETHUMESAN - this means not
only desire, but beyond desire. They had an inner fire to see the face
of the Messiah, and to hear His voice. THUMEO means to burn like
incense. When you add the preposition EPI to the equation, it comes out
even stronger. This is an unquenchable and fiercely hot inner fire.

(d) And Christ does this in order to restore a proper sense of
importance to the day and especially to the content of the parables.

(e) Because the disciples had taken the first parable lightly. There is
evidence to conclude that they left right in the middle of it!

(f) So Christ rocks them a little bit here. What the prophets and
righteous men of old would have given to be here now! Isaiah - Jeremiah
- Hosea - David - Moses - what they would have given!

· When Isaiah prophesies in his eleventh chapter, how he urgently wished
to see Him every day, functioning under wisdom… “Then a shoot will
spring from the stem of Jesse, and a branch from his roots will bear
fruit. The Spirit of the Lord will rest on Him, The spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of
knowledge and the fear of the Lord. And He will delight in the fear of
the Lord, and He will not judge by what His eyes see, nor make a
decision by what His ears hear…”

· When Jeremiah in his thirty first chapter predicted a new covenant for
Israel, how he earnestly desired to be there on the day that Christ gave
the details in His sermon on the mount. Jeremiah would have paid
attention on that day!!!

· When David wrote the twenty second Psalm - he longed to be where the
disciples would not tread - at the cross. How he longed to hear his
Savior say the all important words… “My God, My God, why have You
forsaken Me?”

· When Job in the nineteenth chapter utters his reply to Bildad’s
accusation, you can feel the heat of his inner fire to be at the tomb
with Maria of Magdala on the morning of the third day… “I know that my
redeemer lives, and at the last He will take his stand on the earth.”

Christ’s Interpretation of the Parable of the Sower. “Therefore you
yourselves listen to the parable of the sower. The sower sows the word.
Everyone who hears the word of the kingdom and does not understand it,
the evil one comes and snatches what has been planted in his heart, in
order that they might not be saved after believing. This is the seed
sown beside the road. And the seed sown upon the rocky places, this is
the one who hears the word and immediately receives it with joy,
believing for a while, but he has no root in himself but is short-lived,
and after tribulation comes or persecution because of the word,
immediately he stumbles. And the one sown into the thorns, this is the
one who hears the word, and the care of the world and the distraction of
wealth or the lust concerning the rest chokes the word and he becomes
unfruitful. And the seed sown upon the good earth, this is the one who
hears the word and understands, who indeed bears fruit and makes a
hundred, and sixty, and thirty.’ And He was saying to them, ‘The lamp
does not come in order to be placed under a bushel, or under a bed, is
it? Isn’t it [brought out] in order to be placed on a lampstand? For it
is not a secret unless in order to be revealed, nor does a secret exist,
but to come to light. If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear!’ And He
was saying to them, ‘See that you hear. In what measure you measure it
will be measured to you and it will be increased to you. For who has, it
will be given to him; and who does not have, even what he has will be
taken from him.’”

The introduction.

Our Lord begins with an exhortation to listen. Again, He wants them to
pay attention to what He has to say.

He employs the intensive use of the personal pronoun, adding HUMEIS to
the built-in pronoun of the verb, translated ‘You yourselves.’

(1) Here is an exhortation to take personal responsibility for what is
heard.

(2) No one can advance to spiritual maturity for you. Only you can take
yourself there.

(3) God requires you to become autonomous in the spiritual realm,
passing your own tests with the truth that is in your own soul.

(4) This represents the second admonishment against laziness in this
passage.

(5) This is the truth of the matter: we all stand alone at the judgment
seat of Christ; we will each of us be responsible for our own spiritual
journeys.

The sower sows the word; this is the key that unlocks the parable. Seed
the gospel.

The seed on the road. “Everyone who hears the word of the kingdom and
does not understand it, the evil one comes and snatches what has been
planted in his heart, in order that they might not be saved after
believing. This is the seed sown beside the road.”

This sort of rings a bell… ‘hearing and not understanding.’ This comes
right from the quote in Isaiah.

The reason for the lack of understanding lies with the scar tissue on
the heart of the hearer. It is not the fault of the evangelist that the
gospel has not been understood.

This tells us that the gospel has a limited shelf life in the heart;
that the devil will snatch away what is left on the road.

And it tells us that the seed of the gospel is not implanted and cannot
grow until there is understanding.

It is certain that the devil has various ways of devouring the word, so
that it is taken away from the attention of the hearer.

Now this is prevention on the part of Satan; at no time is this person
saved, even though there is an attempt at evangelism here.

Luke 8:12 contains the phrase HINA ME PISTEUSANTES SOTHOSIN.

(1) HINA is a particle which introduces a purpose clause. This indicates
the purpose of the snatching away.

(2) The aorist participle PISTEUSANTES depicts an action which occurs
prior to the main verb SOTHOSIN. So the believing occurs before the not
being saved.

(3) By placing the negative adverb ME before the participle, the
negation is intended to govern the entire phrase, so that it is really
‘after not believing, they might not be saved.’

(4) The point is that Satan does not want this person to believe and as
a result be saved.

In the original telling of the parable, Luke also included the idea of
trampling with the snatching away. In no gospel is this specifically
explained.

(1) But we can impute a good idea to it, if we are careful. Trampling is
an action of disrespect.

(2) If your nice coat falls from the coat rack, and people tread on it,
they are not respectful of your property, especially if the action is
intentional.

(3) The devil tramples the seed on the road; it maligned by him before
it can be understood.

The seed on the rocks. “And the seed sown upon the rocky places, this is
the one who hears the word and immediately receives it with joy,
believing for a while, but he has no root in himself but is short-lived,
and after tribulation comes or persecution because of the word,
immediately he stumbles.”

Now this person believes. They are said to EUTHUS META CHARAS LAMBANON
AUTON - ‘immediately receiving it with joy.’

The participle LAMBANON portrays an action simultaneous with AKOUON,
‘hearing.’ So this one hears the word and immediately, right at the same
time, believes.

The prepositional phrase META CHARAS AUTON tells us that the individual
in question accompanies his decision to believe in Christ with joy. He
is glad to have salvation.

Just to make things really clear, Luke includes the phrase PROS KAIRON
PISTEUOUSIN ‘they believe for a short while.’

(1) This is the sustaining of belief beyond salvation; they continue in
grace orientation.

(2) Salvation is no longer an issue. It is sealed and secure forever at
the moment of initial belief in Jesus Christ.

(3) We can define post-salvation belief here as the continuation of
positive volition.

The development of root is analogous to the intake of Bible truth.
Metabolized truth in the soul is the root system of the new believer.

Persecution and tribulation are the scorching suns of any believer’s
life. It takes deep roots indeed to endure them.

Notice especially the phrase in Mark 4:17, DIA TON LOGON - ‘because of
the word.’

(1) This is an ironclad guarantee; when the word is implanted,
persecution is sure to follow.

(2) It is Satan’s plan to persecute new believers. He wants their new
faith destroyed, so that they will not advance to the witness stand of
maturity and give a testimony of love for God against him.

(3) If you are a new believer, you had better prepare yourself, because
people are going to come out of nowhere and test you. Every time that
someone makes a good decision to follow God, Satan immediately makes
plans to shine a scorching sun on that person’s faith.

(4) God is faithful, and He will not allow you to be persecuted or
tested in any way beyond your capability. But you must use your time in
order to take hold of the grace that God has provided for that day.

(5) Look: if God provides the grace, and you decide against it, then God
is not responsible for your spiritual demise. You are.

(6) The grace is provided from the very beginning, but you must take
hold of it, and be persistent in its pursuit.

The seed in the thorns.

This the straightforward one. The believer becomes distracted by the
things of this world.

(1) There is the MERIMNAI of this world. These are worries and
anxieties. There are two ways to take care of the details of life.

(a) By responsibly tending to them with a relaxed mental attitude about
the outcome.

(b) By excessive worry, even when you are not working toward the
objective.

(c) The worries of life are the details of life: logistics, what people
think of you or did to you, how you look, how well you are aging, how
well your car is running. Anything that is tied to this world - what
Mark’s gospel (4:19) calls TOU AIONAS.

(2) There is also the PLOUTOU. These are the riches - things above and
beyond salvation.

(a) Getting rich is a pursuit that is certainly tied to this world,
since none of the worldly riches that you accumulate will go to eternity
with you.

(b) Accumulating wealth in this world is one of the all-time emptiest of
pursuits. That is, if it is accumulated for the purpose of wealth
itself. God is not impressed with your accumulation of wealth or
material goods. None of it can possibly add up to heavenly good.

(c) The accumulation of wealth and the pursuit of materialism takes
time, and it adds up to nothing at all.

(d) But there is nothing wrong with being rich… as long as there is no
compromise whatsoever in the spiritual realm.

(e) God actually blesses people with wealth and material gain, and
others come by it through hard work without compromising their
relationship with God. These blessings are meant to be enjoyed.

(f) Sometimes God gives material and monetary prosperity as a
responsibility in giving. He usually makes it clear when there is a
match between what He has given and a special ministry need.

(3) Finally there is the remaining EPITHUMIAI. These are lusts.

(a) This compound word designates the idea of illicit lust. The
preceding categories may have legitimacy in moderation, but this is when
you want something that you cannot morally have.

(b) Of course the pursuit of illicit and immoral gain is not only a
distraction but it keeps you from fellowship with God for the duration
of the pursuit.

No matter what the category, all of these things add up to distraction;
the time spent in pursuit of these things is not worth it, and takes
away from concentration on God.

This all adds up to loss of reward at the judgment seat of Christ. And
really, it doesn’t matter what distracts you, because whether it is
cares of this life, the pursuit of riches, or even illicit lust, it is
not worth it.

The riches to be gained in your heavenly reward so exceed what you can
accumulate in this life, that there is no point of comparison. The
rewards of the next life are exceedingly and abundantly beyond what we
could ask or imagine.

A summary of the bad earth.

You need to understand that each of these conditions add up to bad
decisions on the part of the individual who loses out.

On the part of the road-seed, there is the bad decision not to
understand what is heard, and the devil takes advantage of that bad
decision.

On the part of the rocky-place seed, there is the bad decision to
neglect the development of the root system, so that devil can scorch
them with persecution.

On the part of the thorn-seed, there is the bad decision to become
distracted.

Therefore understand that the analogy compares soil with bad decisions.
You make your own soil by your own decisions in life.

It is never just bad luck that someone’s faith is devoured or scorched
or choked out. It is their bad decision to allow the enemy to take
advantage of them to the point where their faith is destroyed.

The seed on good earth.

The good earth therefore is the believer who makes good decisions and
sets his or her priorities straight.

This good earth produces fruit. This is a picture of plant reproduction.
Christians with their priorities straight reproduce themselves; that is,
they are productive in the Christian realm because of their great
success.

These people are happy, and God has blessed them with blessings
appropriate to their lives. They are beacons of light to the world
because of their success in fulfilling the plan of God.

But there is even greater production in the realm of blessing for time
and eternity.

Some Applications of the Parable to Evangelism.

There is in reality one evangelism strategy here, and two transition
strategies.

People get fouled up in three ways:

(1) They listen to the gospel, but refuse to understand it.

(2) They believe in the gospel, but refuse to grow and develop their
newfound faith.

(3) They believe in the gospel and grow some, but then they become
distracted by the world.

With regard to the first category, the one thing you must do is persist
in the giving of the gospel, and especially pray that God might
intervene in that person’s life to bring their attention to the truth
again and again. Of course, you must always respect their free will, and
if they do not want to listen to the gospel and are tired of the
subject, then leave it until God works in their lives.

With regard to the second category:

(1) You must be prepared to answer their transitional questions, such
as:

(a) What happened when I believed?

(b) What should I do if I sin?

(c) What is required of me now that I am a believer?

(d) Can I lose what I have gained through belief in Christ?

(2) You should be prepared to motivate them by developing in them a
personal love for God.

With regard to the third category:

(1) This is less transitional, because the distraction syndrome may not
manifest itself for years into a person’s Christian walk.

(2) If they will not come to Bible class ( and they know they should),
then there is a challenge there.

(3) The best thing that you can do is be a personal demonstration of the
benefits of the life dedicated to the truth. Let them see by the fruit
of your Christian life that living day by day in the truth is a really
wonderful thing.

(4) If they see the difference between your mental attitude and theirs,
and understand the difference between your quality of life and theirs,
then it is easy to mark the reasons for them.

(5) Never do this in a self-righteous or ‘I told you so’ attitude.

A general explanation concerning communication from God.

“And He was saying to them, ‘The lamp does not come in order to be
placed under a bushel, or under a bed, does it? Isn’t it [brought out]
in order to be placed on a lampstand? For it is not a secret unless in
order to be revealed, nor does a secret exist, but to come to light. If
anyone has ears to hear, let him hear!’ And He was saying to them, ‘See
that you hear. In what measure you measure it will be measured to you
and it will be increased to you.”

Mark 4:21 describes Christ as speaking this last part constantly; this
is the force of the imperfect tense verb ELEGEN. This was not just a one
time saying of Christ; He spoke this often.

So Christ often reminded His disciples of the principle of the lamp and
the lampstand.

This reminder is put into action by means of two questions and then the
principle that answers the questions.

(1) The questions work together as a team; the first question expects a
‘no’ answer, while the second expects a ‘yes’. The combination is
effective because it allows Christ’s listeners to walk through the
conclusion with Him.

(2) The principles are twins, two principles stating the same things
twice.

(a) The first is a silly question, designed to catch attention by its
silliness: “The lamp does not come in order to be placed under a bushel,
or under a bed, does it?” This creates a need for correction.

(b) The second is a reality question, designed to fill the void created
by the first: “Isn’t it [brought out] in order to be placed on a
lampstand?”

(3) The principle applies the metaphor of the lamp and lampstand to the
truth, and especially to kingdom mystery doctrine.

In this metaphor, the lamp is the kingdom mystery doctrines that Christ
has just recently revealed, starting with the Sermon on the Mount. So He
has lit the lamp and it is now out.

How silly to light a lamp and place it under a bushel, or under a bed.
The purpose of the lamp is to give light, and so it is always placed to
best advantage to fulfill the purpose.

For many long ages the mystery doctrine of the kingdom was a hidden
secret. It existed so as to come to light, but at the proper time. God
never has a secret unless He intends to reveal it.

Although God the Father knew the content of the kingdom mystery doctrine
a long time before it was revealed, He let Old Testament saints know of
its existence in order to motivate them.

This is the proper follow on to the principle of the prophet’s longing.
That so many prophets longed to see the Messiah reinforces this
principle.

Then Christ gives his standard phrase, the one He had been shouting
throughout the parable of the sower: “If anyone has ears to hear, let
him hear!”

Because He picks this up again here, and because this was iterated
throughout the Parable of the Sower, you can understand this pretty well
as a device to point attention backward to that body of information.

Because the prophets longed to see what you have seen, and because God
has now placed this kingdom mystery doctrine on a lampstand, pay special
attention to these parables.

Christ is no longer shouting this phrase out to the crowd, but rather to
His disciples and just a few others only. It is exclamatory by nature,
providing the final emphasis to the necessity of the parable.

The consequences of hearing the word. “For who has, it will be given to
him; and who does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.’”

And here He makes a final point: that understanding and applying kingdom
mystery doctrine certainly will have eternal consequences.

If a believer from Christ’s time entered eternity with his soul full of
kingdom mystery doctrine and his life full of a testimony for Him, then
reward would be given.

If anyone from Christ’s time entered eternity without it, then there
would be loss.

For the unbeliever, a permanent loss of opportunity and potential
relationship with God.

For the believer, the loss of reward.

2 Timothy 2:4-5. “(4) No soldier on active duty entangles himself in the
affairs of everyday life so that he may please the one who enlisted him
as a soldier. (5) Furthermore, if anyone competes in the athletic games,
he does not receive a winner’s crown unless he trains according to the
rules.”

Romans 8:18, “For I consider the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory that is to be revealed to us.”

The Order of the Morning Star is an example of that future glory, and
why we must train like we are in the military now:

The order of the morning star is given to the believers who undergo
evidence testing under the personal supervision of Satan, and who
persevere even unto the end.

Our lord’s testing in the desert is the pattern after which we follow.
The royal title of Jesus Christ for the church age is “bright morning
star”, given for his perfect performance in the desert.

(1) Revelation 22:16, “I, Jesus, have sent My angel to testify to you
these things for the churches. I am the [spiritual] root and the
[physical] offspring of David, the bright morning star.”

(2) Numbers 24:17, “A star shall come forth from Jacob.” (from Balaam’s
prophecy).

(3) Matthew 2:2, “Where is He who has been born King of the Jews? For we
saw his star in the east, and have come to worship Him.”

(4) 2 Peter 1:19, “And so we have the prophetic word made more sure, to
which you do well to pay attention as to a lamp shining in a dark place,
until the day dawns and the morning star arises in your hearts.”

By following in the footsteps of Christ all the way through evidence
testing, you receive the same reward, under the title of Jesus Christ.
This reward includes the following.

(1) A uniform of glory, Revelation 3:4,5, “But you have a few people in
Sardis who have not soiled their garments; and they will walk with Me in
white; for they are worthy. He who overcomes shall thus be clothed in
white garments… and I will not erase his name from the book of life,”

(2) Presentation to God the Father and the elect angels in a heavenly
honors ceremony during the tribulation.

(a) Revelation 3:5. “…and I will confess his name before My Father, and
before His angels.”

(b) Colossians 3:4, “When Christ, who is our life, is revealed, then you
will also be revealed with Him in glory.”

(3) A royal title, Revelation 2:17, “To Him who overcomes… I will give
him a white stone, and a new name written on the stone which no one
knows but he who receives it.”

(4) The provision of hidden manna, Revelation 2:17, “to him I will give
some of the hidden manna.”

(a) The original manna was the logistical provision to Israel for the
wilderness journey.

(b) Since that time, manna came to represent spiritual as well as
logistical provision. Psalm 105:40 does this, as well as Ezra in
Nehemiah 9:20.

(c) It is most likely that the hidden manna depicts a category of truth
that has remained hidden throughout human history.

· It is a category not necessary to the spiritual function of any human
being in any time in human history.

· And yet, it is an astounding category of truth that is a unique
privilege to know.

(d) This is fantastic indeed, since it is a part of the blessings for
eternity.

(5) Co-rulership with Jesus Christ in the millennial state:

(a) Romans 5:17, “For if by the transgression of the one, death reigned
through the one, much more those who receive the abundance of grace and
of the gift of righteousness will reign in life through the One, Jesus
Christ.”

(b) 1 Corinthians 4:8, “You are already filled, you have already become
rich, you have become kings without us; and I would indeed that you had
become kings so that we also might reign with you.”

(c) 2 Timothy 2:12, “If we endure, we shall also reign with Him.”

(d) Revelation 3:21, “He who overcomes, I will grant to him to sit down
with Me on My throne, as I also overcame and sat down with My Father on
His throne.”

(e) Revelation 2:26-27, “And he who overcomes, and he who keeps My deeds
until the end, to him I will give authority over the nations; and he
shall rule them with a rod of iron, as the vessels of the potter are
broken to pieces, as I also have received authority from My Father.”

(6) Special privileges in the millennial and eternal state.

(a) Revelation 2:7, “To him who overcomes, I will grant to eat of the
tree of life, which is in the Paradise of God.”

· The Paradise of God is the Garden of Eden, which still exists today.
It is the Garden in which Adam and Eve resided, and is now guarded by
the cherubs with the flaming swords.

· In this garden is the tree of life, which was forbidden to the man and
woman after the fall, because it causes eternal life, Genesis 3:22.
Sinful man plus eternal physical life would equal an eternity of
sinfulness. God prevented this from His mercy!

(b) Revelation 3:12, “He who overcomes, I will make him a pillar in the
temple of My God, and it will definitely not go out from it [the temple]
anymore; and I will write upon it the name of My God, and the name of
the city of My God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven
from My God, and My new name.”

· In the new temple of God, there will be pillars as monuments to those
who are a part of the order of the morning star.

· The pillars will be permanent - they will stand forever.

· On the pillar will be an inscription of God’s name, the name of the
New Jerusalem (which is not yet revealed), and the new name of Jesus
Christ.

· Since the Greek says I will make him a pillar, with a double
accusative, it indicates that the pillar will be a stature in the
likeness of that believer.

· So whenever people and angels come to worship in the eternal state at
the eternal temple, they will be reminded of the church age believers
who made it all the way to maturity and gave a fantastic testimony to
God.

Parable of the Seed
-------------------

Mark 4:26-29

“(26) And He was saying, ‘Thus the kingdom of God is like a man who
casts seed upon the earth, (27) and he lays down and rises up night and
day, and the seed sprouts and grows - how? He himself does not know.
(28) The earth is productive automatically, first a blade then a stalk
then a full grown wheat grain on the stalk. (29) Now whenever the crop
matures, he immediately sends the sickle, because the harvest has stood
together.”

Introduction:

This is the second of the kingdom parables, following the parable of the
sower.

Its intent is to teach a truth about the kingdom of God; the millennial
kingdom which Jesus the Messiah is introducing to the world at this
time.

Remember that although this is the millennial kingdom of Christ some of
these things may indeed be dispensational constants - things which are
true in every era of human history.

We may therefore find many truths that apply to us in these parables.

II. The Interpretation.

The imperfect tense of the verb LEGO here depicts Christ as saying this
particular parable over and over. Again there is the record of
repetition unto inculcation.

Christ compares the kingdom of God to a man who casts seed upon the
earth. All of the verbs in this verse and the next are in the
subjunctive mood. Mark does this in order to communicate the fictional
nature of the parable, because the subjunctive is the mood of unreality.
It delineates action that is not real. He is not talking about any man
in particular, but a fictional man, an example for the sake of
illustration.

The point of comparison is to the man, not to the seed. ANTHROPOS is the
predicative nominative of this first sentence. So we will concentrate on
the perceptions and actions of the man, and compare them to the kingdom
of God.

The first thing that the man does is cast seed on the ground.

Next, he lies down at night and gets up in the morning. This is a
literary way to tell us that some time has past. The few days and weeks
of the germination period of the seeds goes by.

Then the man comes out one morning and notices that the seeds have
sprouted, and on succeeding days he sees those young sprouts grow. His
perception is interesting, though. He has no clue as to how all of this
has happened.

From his point of view, the earth has automatically produced a blade and
then a stalk and then a stalk laden with grain.

Now the verb KARPOPHOREI is in the present indicative.

This indicative mood tells us that this is not hypothetical, but a
general principle of plant growth.

AUTOMATE means that the ground is seen as producing this plant all by
itself. This is an observational truth, even though there are many more
details than meets the naked eye.

But it does not matter to him how it has occurred, when the crop has
matured, he goes and gets his sickle and harvests the crop.

This man is a typical farmer. He has no master’s degree in agronomy or a
PhD in botany. He really does not know how the plants grow - it is a
great wonder to him. But by golly when those stalk-heads are full with
the grain he sure knows what to do - he gets his sickle and starts
harvesting.

Now the kingdom of God is like this man - not like the plants, but like
the man.

This cannot be the point of view of God toward the kingdom of God; God
is not at all ignorant of how things work in His kingdom.

Therefore, it must be the viewpoint of man, and even of believers who
reside in the kingdom and observe its happenings.

The harvest then would be the vagaries of human volition as observed by
anyone in the kingdom of God.

Think about it: this parable follows the parable of the sower, which
classifies bad and good decisions related to the kingdom of God.

From the outside, we may observe that a person is distracted from the
plan of God - their life is in the thorns. Or we may observe that their
life is the seed sown on the road and they are refusing to understand
the impact of the gospel they have heard.

But how can we know every influencing factor? Even if we may know some,
we can never know the microcosm of someone’s decision making.

The human mind is incredibly complex. Add to it years of unique
experience that no one else can experience, and you can see the
difficulty in understanding the decisions that people make.

Although we can observe results, it is not often that we have a clear
picture of the reason. This parable exhorts us not to take concern over
what we do not understand. Rather, it is up to us to do our duty.

As the farmer does not understand the microcosm of the growth of his
crop, and yet he goes out with his sickle and harvests, so also are we
to bring in the spiritual harvest of the kingdom of God.

This is certainly a dispensational constant, true as ever in our time as
in the time of our Lord.

You do not have to be a great psychologist in order to plant the seeds
and bring in the harvest of the Lord.

You do not have to have the least bit of education in order to take up
your own sickle.

Although the human soul is complex, and the reasons for becoming a bad
patch of ground for the gospel seed are many, there are no excuses for
negative volition. God in His holiness will not allow a single excuse to
impugn the integrity of the work of His Son on the cross.

Their excuses are not really our business. There are going to be excuses
that you will never understand and never come to know. But it will be
obvious that the excuse is in operation when the person becomes one of
three bad soil types.

A person refuses to understand the gospel; does it matter why?

A person refuses to undertake spiritual growth immediately after they
are saved; does it matter why?

A person becomes distracted and rejects the doctrinal way of life; does
it matter why?

Their excuses will make them accountable before the judgment seat of
Christ, or even the Great White Throne.

The farmer is accountable for the harvest, and not for understanding the
microcosm of botany.

Likewise, we will be accountable for our spiritual harvest, but not for
understanding the microcosm of psychology behind the positive or
negative volition.

Being accountable for the harvest means doing your duty as an ambassador
for Christ and as a team member in a local church.

(1) When you have an opportunity, give the gospel. Make your own
opportunities and let the Holy Spirit do the rest.

(2) When you run into excuses and negative volition, you can take
appropriate action:

(a) When you get the chance, reiterate the truth. Their excuses do not
matter.

(b) Continue to demonstrate in your life what the benefits to a
relationship with God are. Show everyone what it is like to be content
in God and live an abundant life. Demonstrate to them by your happiness
just what the eternal advantage is.

(c) Continue to pray that God will intervene in their lives so that they
will realize that they are living lives full of excuses, and relinquish
them.

But you do not have to become involved to the point where you are
analyzing their excuses and counseling their negative volition. Christ
specifically says here that this is not a requirement.

Parable of the Tares
--------------------

Matthew 13:24-30; 36-43.

Introduction:

Two parables have been told related to the kingdom of God; they form the
immediate context for this third one.

The first was the parable of the sower, where Christ related bad
decisions to spiritual failure.

The second was the parable of the seeds, where Christ told His followers
how to deal with excuses.

Now we turn to a third parable that has a close relation to the first
two. In this one, we will study the actions of the enemy related to
Christ’s desire to produce a spiritual population for His kingdom.

This parable is more of a dispensational variable than the others,
because it focuses on a group called ‘sons of the kingdom,’ which is
pretty narrow. There is also an unfolding of certain elements of the end
times which will bear a looking into.

Verse twenty four introduces this third parable: “He presented another
parable to them, saying: ‘The Kingdom of the Heavens is compared to a
man who sowed good seed in his field.”

Matthew kicks off the narration with the aorist indicative of
PARATITHEMI - ‘present.’ Christ presented another parable to them.

The idea of this verb is to lay something next to someone as a gift or
an offering.

So Christ offers this to His disciples; He makes a formal presentation
to them.

The adjective ALLEN modifies PARABOLEN. This adjective denotes another
something in the same category as the first something.

The something here is a parable with agriculture as its point of
illustration. But also there is a spiritual comparison.

The spiritual point of comparison is in the realm of evangelism,
according to the proper interpretation of the first two parables.

So here is a man who sowed good seed in his field; sowing seed is of
course giving the gospel.

The twenty fifth verse goes on with the narrative: “But while the men
were sleeping his enemy came and sowed weeds also among the wheat and
left.”

TOUS ANTHROPOUS denotes men plural - the men who work for the landowner.
These men are asleep when a second sowing is done.

EPISPEIRO denotes a sowing of seeds on top of the original one. What can
be done?

The weeds become evident after a while. They cannot possibly be noticed
immediately, since they are just seeds among seeds.

And once the weeds are noticed coming in among the wheat - well that’s
what happens in verse 26.

ZIZANIA is according to A.T. Robertson’s Word Pictures of the New
Testament “…‘darnel,’ a bastard wheat… This bearded darnel, lolium
temulentum, is common in Palestine and resembles wheat except that the
grains are black. In its earlier stages it is indistinguishable from the
wheat stalks so that it has to remain till near the harvest.”

The most obvious interpretation of this element seems to be Judas
Iscariot.

He was indistinguishable from the other apostles, and yet he was the
seed of the devil.

Verses 26-29 record the recognition of the disaster, “(26) And when the
wheat grew up and bore fruit, then the weeds also became evident. (27)
And the slaves of the landowner after coming forward said to him, ‘Lord,
didn’t you sow good seed in your field?’ (28) And he said to them, ‘An
enemy man has done this. But the slaves say to him, ‘Therefore do you
want us to go out and gather them up?’ (29) And he said, ‘No. Lest while
gathering the weeds you might also root out the wheat with them.”

So time passes and the wheat grows and the weeds are recognized. Thus a
meeting ensues.

The slaves of the landowner come forward with an honest question -
because they did not do the sowing, the landowner did.

Remember verse 24, ‘a man sowed good seed in his field.’ This work was
done by the landowner alone, and the slaves had nothing at all to do
with it.

So in seeing the weeds there, the slaves are compelled to ask whether he
sowed good seed.

The landowner would naturally understand their question, and would say -
“Of course not.” Well actually he says, ‘An enemy man has done this.’

The slaves would then as matter of course desire to know their
responsibility. All of those weeds would add up to an awful lot of work
for them, and they need to know how it is to be done.

The landowner concludes that pulling the weeds will pull up the crop of
wheat with them, and so he has a plan.

The thirtieth verse contains that plan: “Let both grow together until
the harvest, and in the time of the harvest I will say to the
harvesters, ‘Gather first the weeds and bind them into bundles in order
to burn them up; but gather the wheat into my barn.”

So it turns out that the work will not fall on the slaves at all, but
rather on another group of workers altogether, the harvesters.

There is some danger and loss in letting them grow together; the weeds
will choke out some of the wheat as they grow. But it is better than
losing the entire crop.

The weeds are to be gathered and bundled and burned first, and then the
wheat is gather into the barn.

The interpretation of this parable comes in Matthew 13:36-43. Christ
there identifies the elements of the parable in this way:

The one who sows the good seed is the Son of Man - Christ Himself.

The field is the world, and the good seed is the sons of the kingdom,
while the weeds are the sons of the evil one.

The enemy who sowed them is the devil, and the harvest is the end of the
age. The harvesters are the angels.

This does much for us in the way of understanding what is going on here,
and how we can apply these truths.

How this parable applies to our function as ambassadors for Christ.

Again this parable concentrates on the issue of responsibility.

You will notice that Christ never identifies the slaves in His
interpretation. They must be human beings as well, even though they do
not do the work of the harvest. Perhaps they are a category of angels
who do not participate in the final harvest of mankind.

The landowner is Jesus Christ, and He always plants good seed.

He plants good seed through us, His ambassadors in His absence. And He
insures the goodness of the seed through the common grace ministry of
God the Holy Spirit.

The good seeds are the sons of the kingdom, people who because of their
belief, and more than that, because of their maturity are chosen to rule
with Christ during the millennium.

Our Lord was at that time hoping to develop a ruling class, an
aristocracy for His kingdom. Since He is royalty, He intended to make
these mature believers His royal family.

But there was negative volition among the Jews, and they rejected His
policy. Therefore the church age began.

Two timelines will help you to understand the contingency of the church
age.

The Jews are positive to Christ’s kingdom.

(1) Christ dies, and pays for the sins of mankind through His death on
the cross.

(2) He rises again on the third day, and ascends on Pentecost to right
hand of the Father, where He sits down on His own exalted throne as King
of kings and Lord of lords.

(3) The tribulation ensues shortly thereafter, and continues for its 7
required years.

(4) Christ returns for the second advent, and the millennium begins,
with the mature Jewish believers as co-rulers with Jesus Christ.

(5) The millennium goes on for its 1000 years and concludes after the
Gog and Magog revolution.

(6) The final judgment occurs, including the judgment of all
unbelievers, the judgment of all Old Testament believers, and the
passing through of all believers into the eternal state.

The Jews reject Jesus Christ (the historical result).

(1) Christ dies, and pays for the sins of mankind through His death on
the cross.

(2) He rises again on the third day, and ascends on Pentecost to right
hand of the Father, where He sits down on His own exalted throne as King
of kings and Lord of lords.

(3) The church age follows for its appointed period of time, known only
to the Father.

(4) The rapture of all church age believers ends the church age, and the
tribulation ensues thereafter, and continues for its 7 required years.

(5) Christ returns for the second advent, and the millennium begins,
with the mature Gentile believers from the church age as co-rulers with
Jesus Christ.

(6) The millennium goes on for its 1000 years and concludes after the
Gog and Magog revolution.

(7) The final judgment occurs, including the judgment of all
unbelievers, the judgment of all Old Testament believers, and the
passing through of all believers into the eternal state.

Jesus Christ never directly causes anyone to believe in Him or to become
the sons of the kingdom; all who believe and mature do so freely and
without direct cause. He does influence them through the provision of
the gospel and intervention in their lives, but that is not the same as
overruling volition.

The field is the world; the KOSMOS according to Matthew 13:38. In this
field there are good seed and bad seed.

The good seed is planted by the Son of Man, and the bad seed is planted
by the devil.

It is the desire of the Son of Man to harvest only the good wheat, the
sons of the kingdom.

But this parable has a stronger grounding in dispensationalism than the
others, because of the phrase ‘the end of the age.’

Christ is here desiring ‘sons of the kingdom,’ which excludes even some
believers.

The enemy man is the devil. He plants the bad seed into the world of
human history.

Through his system of counterfeits and lies, through his development of
false necessities, the devil deceives man.

As a result of the devil’s activities, there are many false ‘sons of the
kingdom.’

These false sons of the kingdom are virtually indistinguishable from the
true ones. They speak the same language, have the same edifice of
morality, etc.

There are many today in this church age who are analogous to this.
Religious and moral types who put on a personality facade that is very
deceptive to their real motives and lives.

Spirituality means that you have a vital relationship with God the
Father through His Son Jesus Christ. Spirituality means being consistent
in fellowship and fulfilling the plan of God through persistent study of
God’s word under your right pastor.




The Satanic counterfeits are many and subtle.

The counterfeit gospels.

(1) Mankind is perfect, and therefore does not need a savior (this for
the really stupid).

(2) Mankind is imperfect, but can save himself.

(a) Various systems of good works.

· Works of compassion, such as feeding the poor and helping the
helpless.

· Works of religion, such as baptism, fervent prayer, feeling sorry for
your sins, etc.

(b) Psychological growth and self-improvement.

(c) Asceticism, or giving up various things in life; even things that
are perfectly acceptable in God’s eyes.

(3) God does not exist, and there is no after life (communist
conclusion), and therefore no need for a savior.

(4) Mankind needs a savior, but must add something to the saving work of
Christ, such as works, asceticism, rites of passage, or schlock
psychology, such as the baptism of the spirit, speaking in tongues, and
other ecstatic experiences.

The counterfeit plan of God.

(1) The Pseudo-purposes.

(a) To grow psychologically.

(b) To witness to others and perpetuate Christianity.

(c) To do good works.

(d) To participate in the rituals of the church.

(e) To give up lots of things.

(2) Pseudo-spirituality.

(a) Spirituality by morality.

(b) Spirituality by rituality.

(c) Spirituality by good works.

(d) Spirituality by mentality.

(e) Spirituality by asceticism.

(f) Spirituality by personality and charisma.

(3) Pseudo-characteristics.

(a) Consistency in fellowship with God is replaced by consistency in the
cosmic system, 1 John 1:6, “If we claim to have fellowship with him yet
walk in the darkness, we lie and do not live by the truth.”

(b) Spiritual self-esteem is replaced by the personal love/personal hate
binary system.

(c) The personal sense of destiny is replaced by dispensational
ignorance or disorientation.

(d) Contentment independent of circumstances is replaced by unhappiness
and circumstantial dependency.

(e) Grace orientation is replaced by humanistic orientation.

(f) Objective mental ability is replaced by subjectivity, emotionalism,
panic, and mental disability.

(g) Integrity is replaced by compromise without virtue.

(h) Humility is replaced by human arrogance.

(i) Doctrinal orientation is replaced by experiential relativism.

The historical counterfeits.

(1) Evolution replaces creationism.

(2) Revisionist histories replace consensus histories.

(3) False conclusions based on humanism replaces the concept that Jesus
Christ controls history.

So Christ decides to the leave the bad wheat in the world until the
final harvest.

Why do the wicked remain on planet earth? Why do the wicked prosper?

Jeremiah asked this very same question in Jeremiah 12:1, “Righteous are
You, O Lord, that I would plead my case with you; indeed I would discuss
matters of justice with You: why has the way of the wicked prospered?
Why are all those who deal in treachery at ease?”

Jeremiah was the prophet who endured the destruction of the Jewish
kingdom of Judah, the southern kingdom of the divided monarchy of
Israel.

He witnessed the destruction of Jerusalem, and even remained on the
ruins of that great city for a while. This is where he wrote the book of
Lamentations.

Col. Thieme has suggested three reasons for this:

Identification with an invisible hero. This is the blessing by
association of the mature believer.

Logistical grace blessing from God, imputed to the divine righteousness
in every believer. Even wicked believers may receive logistical grace
blessing.

They are evil in an evil society, and so they prosper within the
framework of that society. Because it is the devil’s world, Satan has
the power to bless them.

All three of those reasons provide testing to believers in the plan of
God. You must never get your eyes on others, because it will distract
you from fulfilling the plan of God.

It is a strong temptation to feel sorry for yourself as a believer who
is doing the right things and see the wicked prosper.

The temptation becomes even greater when you experience lean times by
yourself.

You think to yourself: “I deserve what they are getting; they do not
live the same sacrificial life that I am living for God, and yet they
have everything. This is unjust.!”

Principle: the wicked cannot take their blessings with them.

Principle: God will bless you with blessings in time and in eternity; it
is a promise from His integrity!

Principle: with the grace assets, you are the richest person in the
world.

So God leaves the wicked on planet earth in order to provide testing to
growing and mature believers.

Their blessing may become blessing for you, if you continue to focus on
God’s plan for you life.

Because when the wicked prosper it is a test of undeserved suffering,
and it offers to do many things for you.

(1) They are designed to refine the testimony of the believer, in
preparation for the witness stand, 1 Pet 1:6-9.

(2) They eliminate hidden arrogance and flaws in the character of the
believer.

(3) They are a preview of what the believer can expect on the witness
stand.

(4) They accelerate the spiritual growth of the believer.

(5) They develop spiritual muscle in the life of the believer.

(6) They develop personal love for God in the heart of the believer.

(7) The sufferings bring about great blessing from God, and therefore
should be endured with a smiling face.

(8) It is also a good idea to keep in mind that you are suffering for
the sake of the one that saved you, Philippians 1:29, “For it has been
granted to you on behalf of Christ not only to believe on him, but also
to suffer for Him”

Should you become distracted by the prosperous wicked, you will lose
your blessings for time and eternity.

(1) The wicked lack capacity for blessing. They do not enjoy what they
have and are filled with fear about losing them.

(2) Death waits ominously to devour them and all the blessings that they
have. Their prosperity will be completely ravaged by death.

Death has no victory over the believer in Jesus Christ, 1 Corinthians
15:54-55, “(54) But when this perishable will have put on the
imperishable, and this mortal will have put on immortality, then will
come about the saying that is written, ‘Death is swallowed up in
victory. (55) ‘O death, where is your victory? O death, where is your
sting?’”

AA. The final verses of this passage give us a reason to undertake a
quick review of eschatology.

The purpose of the end times is to bring final glory to God in the
angelic appeal trial. The end times follow the outline of the closing
phases of a trial.

The tribulation forms the final arguments of Satan. It is his
presentation of the earth’s environment under his complete control. This
will turn into an unmitigated disaster, because Satan, though the most
brilliant of a brilliant race, is not capable of ruling this planet,
even when everything is under his control.

(1) The tribulation begins with the rapture of the church. This is where
all church age believers are taken from the earth and meet Jesus Christ
in the physical universe. It is there that they will receive their
resurrection bodies.

(2) The second advent of Jesus Christ ends the tribulation. The battle
of Armageddon results in the total destruction of the armies of Satan,
and he and his fallen angel minions are imprisoned in the Abyss. Thence
follows two judgments.

(a) The baptism of fire, which is the judgment of all unbelievers of the
tribulation, both Jew and Gentile, Matthew 25:31-46; Ezekiel 20:33-48.

(b) The evaluation of all tribulational believers, both Jew and Gentile,
Matthew 25:31-46; Daniel 12:2-3.

The millennial rule of Jesus Christ forms the closing arguments of God
in the angelic appeal trial.

(1) With the fallen angels bound, and Christ together with the mature
believers from the church age ruling over the planet, the environment is
truly fantastic. The establishment code for the millennium has total and
successful implementation.

(2) There is no more war, and on top of that, there is prosperity of
every kind. Man and nature will live in complete harmony.

(3) This makes a complete rebuttal of the chaos of the Satanic attempts
at perfect environment.

And then there is a final judgment. At the great white throne, there are
three categories of judgments.

(1) The judgment of believers.

(a) All believers who lived before the incarnation, both Jew and
Gentile, are judged at this time.

(b) All Millennial believers are judged at this time.

(2) The judgment of unbelievers. All unbelievers in history, except
those of the tribulation, are judged at this time. Matthew 25:3146,
Ezekiel 20:3238, Revelation 20:7-10.

(3) The judgment of all fallen angels at the end of the Millennium.
Their sentence was passed before time began, but its execution is not
carried out until the end of human history.

So now we have a frame of reference for the last part of what Christ
says. “(41) The Son of Man will send His angels, and they will gather
from His kingdom all the stumbling blocks and those who manufacture
lawlessness (42) and they will cast them into the furnace of fire; in
that place there will be the weeping and the gnashing of the teeth. (43)
Then the righteous will shine forth like the sun in the kingdom of their
Father. The one who has ears, let him hear.’”

This is the end of the millennial kingdom, where all the unbelievers of
the millennium are gathered up and judged.

They are cast into the furnace of Fire, where there will be [forever]
the weeping and gnashing of teeth.

But the righteous enter into eternal bliss with the Father; they will
shine forth like the sun in the kingdom of the Father.

And then Christ finishes with the exhortation toward hearing.

BB. And this is the true application of the parable: it is the business
of the Son of Man to execute final judgment on all the people of the
world. He has not given us that authority at all.

Blanket judgment is when you conclude that someone is beyond the point
of no return.

There is no such as that of someone who is beyond the ability of grace.
God’s grace can always act as long as that someone is alive and able to
comprehend truth in an academic sense.

Therefore, unless the matter is a case for the establishment
authorities, or within a realm of our personal responsibility, we are to
stay clear of judging.

The Bible issues stern warnings about judgment. Listen to a few:

Matthew 7:1-2 “‘Do not judge, or you too will be judged. For in the same
way you judge others, you will be judged, and with the measure you use,
it will be measured to you.’”

You receive Divine discipline for the mental attitude sin.

You receive Divine discipline for the verbal sin.

You receive Divine discipline for the sin of the other person.

It is not worth it.

Romans 14:10-13, “You, then, why do you judge your brother? Or why do
you look down on your brother? For we will all stand before God’s
judgment seat. It is written:”‘As surely as I live,’ says the Lord,
‘every knee will bow before me; every tongue will confess to God.’ So
then, each of us will give an account of himself to God. Therefore let
us stop passing judgment on one another. Instead, make up your mind not
to put any stumbling block or obstacle in your brother’s way.”

1 Corinthians 4:5, “Therefore judge nothing before the appointed time;
wait till the Lord comes. He will bring to light what is hidden in
darkness and will expose the motives of men’s hearts. At that time each
will receive his praise from God.”

Ultimately, the right to judge is reserved for our Lord Jesus Christ,
who will judge all church age believers at the judgement seat of Christ.

Many times, people will judge because they fear they will not be
vindicated. When you have confidence in the justice of God, then this
fear will be removed.

Jesus Christ will be perfectly fair at the judgment seat. No detail will
escape His attention.

Jesus Christ is the only person who is perfectly qualified to judge the
human race. He died for those sins. He, too lived a human life, and was
tempted far beyond what we will ever encounter.

When we overstep the boundaries of our legitimate right to judge, then
we presume to take the place of Jesus Christ. James 4:12, “There is only
one Lawgiver and Judge, the one who is able to save and destroy. But
you–who are you to judge your neighbor?”

Parable of the Mustard Seed
---------------------------

Matthew 13:31-32

“(31) He presented another parable to them, saying, ‘The kingdom of the
heavens is like a mustard seed, which a man after taking sowed in his
field; (32) which is the smallest of all the seeds but whenever it has
grown is greater than the garden plants and becomes a tree, so that the
birds of the heaven come and rest in its branches.”

Mark 4:30-32

“(30) And He was saying, ‘How should we liken the kingdom of God, or in
what way should we place it? (31) [It is] like a mustard seed, which
whenever it might be sown upon the earth, though it is smaller than all
of the seeds of those upon the earth, (32) yet whenever it is sown,
comes up and becomes greater than all of the garden plants and forms
large branches, so that the birds of the heaven are able to rest under
its shade.’”

Introduction.

Well, another parable from the agricultural frame of reference; this
from the herb garden at the house and not the crop in the field. This
may more properly be a city or town parable than a country parable.

Christ does not interpret this parable - He considers that part of it
obvious, and so leaves it to the reader. But we are not left without the
ability of comparison.

The previous parable was the parable of the weeds, where the good seeds
are the sons of the kingdom.

In the parable of the sower, the seeds represent the gospel. But our
present parable follows more closely on the weeds, and so we should take
that as the principle of greater influence.

Again Mark uses the Greek imperfect tense of the verb ‘LEGO,’ ‘to say.’
The imperfect tense tells us that Christ spoke this parable to the
disciples again and again.

This would account for the apparent discrepancies between Matthew’s and
Mark’s accounts.

The language differs somewhat significantly between the accounts; but if
they record two separate statements of the parable at about the same
time, there is no difficulty at all.

Exposition.

Mark employs a combination of grammar that is called the deliberative
subjunctive. Its purpose is rhetorical and it generally ponders an
ethical theme. The deliberative subjunctive puts a question in the
subjunctive mood.

This serves as a rhetorical device; a way to get your audience thinking
about what you are saying.

This deliberative question has Christ asking His audience - ‘What is the
right way to illustrate the kingdom of heaven?’

When He goes on with the illustration of the mustard seed, you
immediately assume that this is the perfect illustration of the kingdom
of heaven.

The essence of this parable is easy.

The mustard seed is a small seed.

Surprisingly, it grows into the greatest of all the garden plants (those
known to the people of Christ’s geography).

It becomes useful to the birds as a home and for shade.

Let’s look at some of the details.

The mustard seed is the smallest (MIKROTERON) of all the seeds which are
upon the earth (EPI TES GES).

The mustard seed was indeed the smallest in their ancient frame of
reference for seeds.

EPI TES GES is not necessarily a reference to the entire world; in fact,
the Jews commonly referred to their country as ‘the land.’ The Greeks
translated this phrase as TES GES.

So Christ’s proclamation does not cover the entire earth at all, but
just that portion which encompasses the Holy Land.

The mustard tree is the greatest (MEIZON) of all the garden plants
(LACHANON).

Again Christ’s proclamation is limited. The mustard plant grows to a
height of 4-15 feet in the promised land, and that is under ideal
conditions.

This has to do with the cultivation of a house garden. The LACHANON is
the sphere of the plants of the garden, and therefore does not include
the plants of the field and regular agriculture.

Both gospels employ the verb KATASKENOO to describe the resting of the
birds in the mustard plant. This means to ‘camp’ or ‘rest.’ The idea
comes from the military bivouac - an overnight but not necessarily
permanent resting spot.

This parable is therefore a description of God’s spiritual plan for the
kingdom:

See the Review of the Beatitudes.

The spiritual code for the millennium - that little bit of truth -
brings forth a big and restful tree.

In fact, Christ has already presented us with the restful nature of His
plan; it is His yoke that is easy…

Matthew 11:28-30, “(28) Come to Me, all who are weary and heavy-laden,
and I will give you rest. (29) Take My yoke upon you and learn from me,
for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your
souls. (30) For My yoke is easy and My burden is light.”

The learning yoke of Christ has to do with the rehabilitation of the
soul. The soul under the cosmic system is in a burdensome slavery;
thanks to rehabilitation and reestablishment of the proper relationship
with God, the burden is removed and rest ensues.

The mustard seed is therefore the gospel, and when it grows up it
produces peace and rest in the soul.

Philippians 2:12, “So then, my beloved, just as you have always obeyed,
not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out
your salvation with fear and trembling.”

Romans 5:1, “Therefore having been justified by faith, let us have peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.”

Poise and psychological tranquility are key elements of spiritual
maturity; they are signs of a strong personal love for God. 1 John 4:18,
“There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out fear, because fear
involves punishment, and the one who fears is not perfected in love.”

And personal love for God is the fulfillment of the greatest
commandment, Deuteronomy 6:5, “You shall love the Lord your God with all
your heart and with all your soul and with all your might.”

The Remaining Parables
----------------------

Matthew 13:33-35, “(33) He spoke to them another parable: the kingdom of
the heavens is like leaven, which a woman after taking hid it into three
pecks of meal, until it was all leavened. (34) Jesus spoke all these
things in parables to the crowds and apart from parables He spoke
nothing to them, (35) so that what was spoken through the prophet might
be fulfilled, saying, ‘I will open My mouth in parables; I will utter
things which have been hidden since the foundation of the world.’”

Mark 4:33-34, “(33) And He was speaking the word to them with many such
parables as they were continuously able to hear. (34) But He was not
speaking to them apart from the parable, but He was explaining
everything privately to His own disciples.”

Matthew 13:44-52, “(44) The kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure
which has been hidden in the field, which a man after finding hid, and
from his joy goes and sells all which he has, and buys that field. (45)
Again, the kingdoms of the heavens is like a merchant man seeking fine
pearls; (46) and after finding one pearl of great value, after going
forth he has sold everything which he had, and he bought it. (47) Again
the kingdom of the heavens is like a dragnet which after being cast into
the sea and after gathering [fish] of every kind; (48) which after it
has been filled, after being dragged up on the beach and after sitting
down they gathered the good into a container, but the rotten they threw
out. (49) So also it will be at the end of the age; the angels will come
forth and take out the evil from the midst of the righteous (50) and
cast them into the furnace of the fire; in that place there will be the
weeping and the gnashing of the teeth. (51) Do you understand all these
things?’ They said to Him, ‘Yes.’ (52) But He said to them, ‘For this
reason every scribe after becoming a disciple in the kingdom of the
heavens is like a man who is the head of a household, who casts out from
his treasury new things and old things.’

An outline:

The parable of leaven.

Christ’s strategy for the parables.

As many as the people could hear.

A full explanation to His disciples in private.

The fulfillment of a prophecy.

The parable of the hidden treasure.

The parable of the pearl of great value.

The parable of the dragnet.

The parable.

The explanation of the parable of the dragnet.

Christ’s questioning of His disciples and their brief reply.

The last parable - the parable of the Scribe.

II. The exposition.

The parable of the leaven.

“He spoke to them another parable: the kingdom of the heavens is like
leaven, which a woman after taking hid it into three pecks of meal,
until it was all leavened.”

The leaven is the point of comparison; not the woman or the meal. The
leaven is hidden into three pecks of meal.

ALEUROU is the wheat flour, or meal used in making the bread of the
ancient world.

The word peck comes from the Greek SATA, interestingly enough.

The word itself denotes a certain measure of grain equal to about 12
quarts of dry measure. It was a pretty fair amount of grain, if you
consider 36 quarts dry measure of meal. This is more than a bushel in
our U.S. units of measure.

But its similarity to SATAN cannot be missed. It would be ludicrous and
irresponsible to say that the kingdom of the heavens is placed inside of
Satan himself. There is nothing personal in this paranomasia, or play on
words.

But listen: here is a picture of how the kingdom of God influences the
devil’s world.

The kingdom is the leaven, which operates through all believers with
momentum, but is especially effective through mature believers.

When the word of God operates in the soul of a believer there is a
strong dynamic toward affecting others.

As a growing and mature believer, you may have a profound affect on the
world around you.

You may do so through your proficiency and integrity and courage in a
job that could change the course of history.

(1) It could be in the area of technology; you may achieve a
technological or perhaps a medical breakthrough that causes many lives
to change for the better.

(2) It could be in the area of statesmanship; you may achieve diplomatic
or legislative significance.

(3) It could be in the military realm. You do not have to be a high
ranking officer or NCO to change the course of a battle or a war. God
simply has to implement His perfect sense of timing for you as a soldier
to change history.

You may do so by saying the right thing in the right way at the right
time.

(1) You may be the cause of many becoming mature; you may be the cause
of many who come to a belief in Jesus Christ.

(2) You may change the course of history because someone listened to
your establishment viewpoint, and decided to stay the course with regard
to marriage, family, and nation.

You may do so because God blesses you by association, and so your
neighborhood, and your city, and your country might receive blessing
because of your dogged determination to advance to spiritual maturity.
Job 1:1-2:6 cf. 42:10-17.

(1) Those who love God the most cause magnificent blessing to distribute
around them.

(2) Although few will realize it in the human realm, the angelic realm
remains entirely informed concerning human affairs and human blessings.

God energizes change through the course of human events. He disciplines
and blesses nations in the devil’s world, but mainly through the
existence and function of believers.

The blessings and disciplines are done through impersonal love, and
designed to focus thought on the spiritual issues of a person’s life.

The objective of divine intervention in human history and human lives is
to change a life or many lives by making people think about the
spiritual issues of their lives.

But they must have influence from others in order to make the change.
Someone must provide information so that the change is in fact
available.

Christ’s strategy for the parables. “And He was speaking the word to
them with many such parables as they were able to hear, but He was
explaining everything privately to His own disciples. So that what was
spoken through the prophet might be fulfilled, saying, ‘I will open My
mouth in parables; I will utter things which have been hidden since the
foundation of the world.’”

Mark employs the Greek phrase TOIAUTAIS PARABOLOAIS POLLAIS - many such
parables.

Christ spoke many parables just like the ones we have been sampling. As
a matter of fact, Matthew’s gospel makes the record complete.

This is a great example of why more than one gospel writer was an
excellent idea on the part of God the Holy Spirit.

Had it been up to Mark, the parables recorded after this point would not
have been a part of the canon of Scripture.

Whereas Mark decided to keep the narrative moving, Matthew thought it
best to provide a complete chronicle of the information.

Next is the phrase KATHOS EDUNANTO AKOUEIN - just as they were
continuously able to hear. This too is an important concept in this
phase of Christ’s ministry.

The imperfect tense of DUNAMAI shows an ongoing action. Christ wanted
them to take in as much as they were continuously able to hear.

This is a stepped up operational pace for the ministry of Christ, and it
sets a standard for every ministry in history.

The operational pace of a ministry should have the same objective as
here.

Since soul rehabilitation is of paramount importance, and inculcation
toward the fullest love for God, and since the means of these great
things is the intake and application of God’s word - what is stopping
any ministry from emulating this virtuous course?

To His disciples He explained the nature of these parables in private.

They were the ones with a heightened interest in the meaning of the
parables. Remember, the crowd was fulfilling the prophesy of Isaiah
about hearing and seeing and not understanding.

But His disciples had a deeper interest in the principles of the
kingdom, and so they received the full explanation.

Until anyone from the crowd expressed a further interest, they would
receive no further explanation.

Perhaps some of the crowd figured out the meanings of the parables for
themselves. A parable may be deciphered without too much trouble…

Matthew is quick to point out that Christ’s parabolic ministry is the
fulfillment of a prophecy from Psalm 78:2: “So that what was spoken
through the prophet might be fulfilled, saying, ‘I will open My mouth in
parables; I will utter things which have been hidden since the
foundation of the world.’”

Matthew is often motivated to do this very thing, because he has a
Jewish readership.

It is Matthew’s objective to have his Jewish readers accept that Jesus
was their Messiah.

By showing time and again that Old Testament prophecies were fulfilled
in Christ, Matthew leads them effectively to that conclusion.

With these parables, Christ is revealing things which have been hidden
since the foundation of the world.

The kingdom of God is Jesus Christ’s direct rule over mankind; it is His
millennial kingdom.

There are two policies for that kingdom:

(1) A spiritual code, which was unveiled in the beatitudes.

(2) An establishment code, which was unhidden in the remainder of the
Sermon on the Mount.

Those policies were conceived by God the Father at the foundation of the
world.

(1) Matthew employs the phrase APO KATABOLES KOSMOU in order to do this
- literally, ‘from the foundation of the world.’

(2) KATABOLES is foundation, and it concentrates entirely upon the
original creation of planet earth, some 4.5 billion years ago.

(3) God made this planet for the angels, Job 38:4-11. Long before the
advent of man, while God was making this planet for a superior race of
creatures, God conceived the plan of the millennial kingdom of His Son.

(4) Long before the fall of Satan, and long before the fall of Adam in
the Garden, God wanted His Son to rule this planet in glory.

(5) Although the millennial rule of Christ will serve as the perfect
counterpoint to the chaos of Satan’s tribulation, it would have brought
glory to God’s name even without the fall of creatures.

The original context of the 78th Psalm adds further light to our
passage.

(1) The Psalm is about the guidance of God even to an unfaithful people.
At 72 verses, it is one of the longest of the Psalms.

(2) “(1) Listen, O my people, to my instruction; incline your ears to
the words of my mouth. I will open my mouth in a parable; I will utter
dark sayings of old, (3) which we have heard and known, and our fathers
have told us.”

(3) But you can see there is a difference, because the Psalm seems to
indicate that the information was well known to the people of Israel,
while Matthews seems to say that it has lain hidden since the foundation
of the world and only just then revealed in Christ.

(4) Verse five of the Psalm tells of the source of the information and
thereby gives a clue: “For He established a testimony in Jacob and
appointed a law in Israel, which He commanded our fathers that they
should teach them to their children…”

(a) There are two beginnings to the revelation in this Psalm: the first
is with Jacob, who became Israel. The second is with the Law, which came
through Moses in 1400 BC

(b) These denote the beginning of a new dispensation - the dispensation
of Israel.

(c) And here is what you should concentrate on: the information
regarding the dispensation of Israel had lain hidden since the
foundation of the world until it was revealed in Jacob and in the Law of
Moses.

(d) For that reason, it was a parallel to the kingdom doctrines revealed
by Jesus Christ.

(5) All dispensation information was conceived by God at the foundation
of the world.

(a) It is only at the onset of that dispensation that the information is
set forth to the world.

(b) So Matthew is saying that Christ is at the beginning of a brand new
dispensation; that He is the Messiah, and that He has brought His
kingdom.

The parable of the hidden treasure, Matthew 13:44, “The kingdom of the
heavens is like a treasure which has been hidden in the field, which a
man after finding hid, and from his joy goes and sells all which he has,
and buys that field.”

Some time ago, a treasure was hidden in a field. Someone comes and finds
it, and before he can claim the treasure he must own the property. So he
goes and sells all his possessions so that he might buy the field. You
have heard this story many times with many different variations.

In Perry Eberhart’s classic book, Treasure Tales of the Rockies there
are more 125 tales of lost mines and treasures centered in the state of
Colorado alone.

Some treasure tales are true, a very few are enough to produce hundreds
and thousands of stories of lost treasure.

So here is this nervous, nervous man, who finds a treasure which has
been hidden in a field. So he hides it again, and then buys the field.
Then the treasure is legally his.

Well, now, the kingdom of the heavens is like that treasure.

It is so valuable that it is worth more than everything you have.

And as a matter of fact, many people do give up all they have in order
to purchase the field that contains that treasure.

The value of the kingdom of the heavens is beyond all worldly wealth.
Consider:

The wilderness temptation of Jesus Christ.

(1) The three temptations of Christ in the wilderness follow the three
failures of Israel in their wilderness journey:

(a) They failed the manna test, which was a rejection of the logistical
provision of God.

(b) They failed the golden calf test, which was an embracing of
idolatry. As a result, Moses broke the tablets of the Law which God had
given.

(c) They failed the test of Aaron’s rod, which was a rejection of
divinely appointed authority.

(2) Christ was tempted after this same pattern:

(a) He was tempted with regard to the stones and the bread: Luke 4:2-4,
“And He ate absolutely nothing during those days; and at the concluding
of them, He hungered. And the devil said to Him, ‘If You are the Son of
God, speak to this stone that it might become bread.’ And Jesus answered
him, ‘It is written, ’Man shall not live on bread alone.’”

· At the end of forty days of eating absolutely nothing, our Lord was
very hungry. It was the kind of hunger where all you can think about is
food. At forty days without food, even the healthiest of human beings is
at the extreme limit of endurance.

· The temptation itself is related to the principle of kenosis; Christ
does not have the authority to do this thing apart from the power and
timing of the Spirit.

· The devil knows that the Divine Power is available, but that its use
would invalidate the purpose of the incarnation. Again and again Satan
says this about the stones; this temptation lasted longer than just a
moment.

· In the later temptation His Scriptural reply is abbreviated, as though
He is at the very end of His endurance, or because it is not necessary
to repeat the whole thing.

· This test relates to the logistical test of Israel:

- The Israelites had something to eat every day. Manna was the world’s
greatest health food. It was the same thing, but it was something.

- Christ had nothing to eat for forty days and forty nights. Therefore,
His test was far greater than what they endured. He ate the same thing
every day: Nothing.

- Placing the manna inside the ark of the covenant foreshadowed this
test of our Lord. It commemorated Christ’s victory in the desert, and it
looked forward to the redemption of this failure at the cross, as
represented by the mercy seat.

- The essence of the temptation had to do with the temptation to use His
divine attributes or rely on what God provided His humanity.

- The very reason for the incarnation would have been undermined and
destroyed had Christ given in here. The cross and the Christian way of
life would have instantly become meaningless.

- Note that Christ quotes from Deuteronomy 8:3.

- The context of this verse is Moses’ final exhortation to the children
of Israel before their occupation of the promised land.

- All three of Christ’s replies will come from this speech.

- These three things denote readiness for the blessings of the land of
milk and honey:

- First, there is worship of the one true God and abstinence from
idolatry. This is personal love for God.

- Second, there is humble acceptance of the circumstances of your life,
good or bad, and acceptance of delegated human authority, good or bad.

- Third, there is a devotion to the word of Truth, and acceptance of
God’s logistical grace.

- This scripture was originally learned and inculcated by Christ,
probably at a very young age.

- At this appropriate time, the Spirit recalled this passage into
Christ’s spiritual frame of reference, His human spirit. Christ
instantly understood the issue.

- Now the issue remained: Would He apply what had been recalled? The
answer is of course. He even quotes the passage directly to the devil.

- Deuteronomy 8:1-10, “All the commandments that I am commanding you
today you shall be careful to do, that you may live and multiply, and go
in and possess the land which the Lord sword to give to your
forefathers. And you shall remember all the way which the Lord your God
has led you in the wilderness these forty years, that He might humble
you, testing you, to know what was in your heart, whether you would keep
His commandments or not. And He humbled you and let you be hungry, and
fed you with manna which you did not know, nor did your fathers know,
that He might make you understand that man does not live on bread alone,
but man lives by everything that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord.
Your clothing did not wear out on you, nor did your foot swell these
forty years. Thus you are to know in your heart that the Lord your God
was disciplining you just as a man disciplines his son. Therefore, you
shall keep the commandments of the Lord your God, to walk in His ways
and to fear Him. For the Lord your God is bringing you into a good land,
a land of brooks of water, of fountains and springs, flowing forth in
valleys and hills; a land of wheat and barley, of vines and fig trees
and pomegranates, a land of olive oil and honey; a land where you shall
eat food without scarcity, in which you shall not lack anything; a land
whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills you can dig copper. When
you have eaten and are satisfied, you shall bless the Lord your God for
the good land which He has given you.”

(b) Luke 4:5-8, “And he led Him up and showed Him all the kingdoms of
the world in a moment of time. And the devil said to Him, ‘I will give
You all this domain and its glory; for it has been handed over to me,
and I give it to whomever I wish. Therefore if You worship before me, it
shall all be Yours.’ And Jesus answered and said to him, ‘It is written,
’You shall worship the Lord your God and serve Him only.’”

· There is only one instance of temptation here. The show occurred in
one moment of time. Ahem, he did not want Christ to look too closely.
Again the used car salesman analogy.

· Christ would be given delegated authority from Satan over all these
kingdoms, along with the glory of them. Let me point out that the glory
of the devil’s world is only a veneer.

· The enemy did not receive the kingdoms of the world because of
meritorious service. He deceived Adam, and received the authority
because of Adam’s irresponsible sin.

· All of the kingdoms of the world would belong to Christ at the right
time, and only when His chosen people would accept Him as the Messiah.

· This particular condition was not yet fulfilled, and in fact the early
indicators were not looking good. In other words, this was attacking
Christ at a potential weak spot. The greatness of the world made the
temptation all the more agonizing.

· That Christ would continue in poverty for the rest of his life is a
testimony to his fantastic resolve. Part of this test had to do with
timing, and part of with idolatry. It harkens back to the failure of the
golden calf.

· Christ’s solution to this problem comes from Deuteronomy 6:13. Let’s
read that passage beginning in verse 10. “Then it shall come about when
the Lord your God brings you into the land which He swore to your
fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give you great and splendid
cities which you did not build, and houses full of all good things which
you did not fill, and hewn cisterns which you did not dig, vineyards and
olive trees which you did not plant, and you shall eat and be satisfied,
then watch yourself, lest you forget the Lord who brought you from the
land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. You shall fear only the Lord
your God; and you shall worship Him, and swear by His name. You shall
not follow other gods, any of the gods of the peoples who surround you,
for the Lord your God in the midst of you is a jealous God; otherwise
the anger of the Lord your God will be kindled against you, and He will
wipe you off the face of the earth.”

- Note that the blessings of the Promised Land are neither earned nor
deserved. Yet they are given freely by God.

- The offer from Satan is something similar, but infinitely less because
of the object of worship. The satisfaction that comes from a
relationship with God is so great as to add to one’s appreciation and
enjoyment of the attendant blessings. In the worship of idols, all the
things turn to dust.

- Christ applies the perfect passage for this specific temptation,
another great testimony to the work of the Spirit and the level of
inculcation that Christ has reached.

(c) Luke 4:9-12, “And he led Him to Jerusalem and stood Him upon the
pinnacle of the temple, and said to Him, ‘If You are the Son of God,
throw Yourself down from here; for it is written, bear You up, Lest You
strike Your foot against a stone.’ And Jesus answered and said to him,
‘It is said, You shall not put the Lord your God to the test.’”

· Note that in this test the enemy is using Scripture against Christ. It
is an oft-used ploy, and it seldom fails. This points out the necessity
for a prepared pastor to prepare you.

· The enemy quotes Psalm 91 in the temptation. Verses 11 and 12 are
quoted but taken out of context. The whole Psalm goes like this, “He who
dwells in the shelter of the Most High will rest in the shadow of the
Almighty. I will say of the Lord, ‘He is my refuge and my fortress, my
God, in whom I trust.’ Surely he will save you from the fowler’s snare
and from the deadly pestilence. He will cover you with his feathers, and
under his wings you will find refuge; his faithfulness will be your
shield and rampart. You will not fear the terror of night, nor the arrow
that flies by day, nor the pestilence that stalks in the darkness, nor
the plague that destroys at midday. A thousand may fall at your side,
ten thousand at your right hand, but it will not come near you. You will
only observe with your eyes and see the punishment of the wicked. If you
make the Most High your dwelling - even the Lord, who is my refuge -
then no harm will befall you, no disaster will come near your tent. For
he will command his angels concerning you to guard you in all your ways;
they will lift you up in their hands, so that you will not strike your
foot against a stone. You will tread upon the lion and the cobra; you
will trample the great lion and the serpent. ‘Because he loves me,’ says
the lord, ‘I will rescue him; I will protect him, for he acknowledges my
name. He will call upon me, and I will answer him; I will be with him in
trouble, I will deliver him and honor him. With long life will I satisfy
him and show him my salvation.’”

- This Psalm is about trust in God, and how God responds to those who
love Him.

- Especially pertinent is the conditional clause of verse 9: “If you
make the most high your dwelling” This means that the following verses
depend on the fulfillment of this condition.

· Christ could not demand that God send his angels to cushion up his
fall… that would be putting God to the test, as what happened in the
wilderness at the waters of Meribah.

· This test appears to be about the establishment of Christ’s earthly
authority. A good miracle in front of thousands of temple worshippers
including the most important men in Israel would well establish Christ’s
authority among the Jews.

· How soon they forget. Christ was only forty days before the object of
the triple miracle of His baptism. The heavens split open; the voice of
God spoke; the Spirit descended in the form of a dove. Yet this miracle,
probably in front of those same leaders who were now below in the temple
court, did not convince the people to follow Christ.

· The spiritual gift of miracles would establish Christ’s authority at
the proper time. This was not that time. The gift of miracles functions
under the sovereignty of the Spirit so that He chooses the time the
place and the miracle to be performed.

· The devil is trying to promote Christ before God could promote Him.
The devil is attempting to foist onto Christ an Aaron’s rod that budded
scenario. He is attempting to do so by quoting Scripture that sounds
right.

· Christ rightfully sorts this one out, and quotes Deuteronomy 6:16. The
full passage through verse 19 goes like this: “Do not test the Lord your
God as you did at Massah. Be sure to keep the commands of the Lord your
God and the stipulations and decrees he has given you. Do what is right
and good in the Lord’s sight, so that it may go well with you and you
may go in and take over the good land that the Lord promised on oath to
your forefathers, thrusting out all your enemies before you as the Lord
said.”

- Again this is a quote from Moses final speech in preparation for the
second generation to enter the promised land.

- This time it was done right by Christ. He passed the tests that Israel
failed.

- In a completely appropriate way, the three items in the ark of the
covenant represent both the failure of Israel and the triumph of Christ.

- Christ not only paid for our sins, but He also produced the
righteousness which would be imputed to us at salvation.

- In producing that righteousness Christ established a way of solving
problems which He would leave as a heritage for all church age
believers.

(3) Christ’s wilderness temptations are a reminder that He was offered
logistics, prosperity, and success at the compromise of His integrity
and relationship with God. This He could not do. But as a result of His
faithfulness to God, there is reward.

(4) Philippians 2:5-11, “(5) Have this attitude in yourselves which was
also in Christ Jesus, (6) who, although He existed in the form of God,
did not regard equality with God a thing to be grasped, (7) but emptied
Himself, taking the form of a bond-servant, and being made in the
likeness of men. (8) Being found in appearance as a man, He humbled
Himself by becoming obedient to the point of death, even death on a
cross. (9) For this also, God highly exalted Him, and bestowed on Him
the name which is above every name, (10) so that at the name of Jesus
every knee will bow, of those who are in heaven and on earth and under
the earth, (11) and that every tongue will confess that Jesus Christ is
Lord, to the glory of God the Father.”

(5) Hebrews 12:1-2, “(1) Therefore, since we have so great a cloud of
witnesses surrounding us, let us also lay aside every encumbrance and
the sin which so easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the
race that is set before us, (2) fixing our eyes on Jesus, the author and
perfecter of faith, who for the joy set before Him endured the cross,
despising the shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of
God.”

Romans 8:18, “For I consider that the sufferings of this present time
are not worthy to be compared with the glory that is to be revealed to
us.”

1 Peter 1:7, “in order that your testing of faith, much more valuable
than gold (which being refined even through the testing of fire) might
be found unto praise and glory and honor in the revelation of Jesus
Christ;”

We can categorize the treasure of the kingdom of the heavens in the
following way:

Blessings for time:

(1) Spiritual Blessings.

(a) Spiritual blessing means maximum spiritual function and awareness.
Spiritual blessing means maximum use of the problem solving devices
provided by God for spiritual adulthood.

(b) Your relationship with God is fantastic and is based upon a
tremendous confidence that, while you have never seen God, you know Him
and understand Him as He has revealed himself in Bible truth.

(c) You have a relationship with self that is honest and virtuous. This
means that your ability to evaluate yourself is functioning at its
maximum potential. This means that you are able to recognize your own
limitations and adapt your life to them.

(d) You have maximum production in Christian service.

(e) Maximum function of your spiritual gift.

(f) You have a fantastic personal sense of destiny, and you are able to
related the events of your life to the angelic conflict.

(g) Maximum virtue and God-centered vindication instead of
self-righteousness.

(2) Worldly Blessings.

(a) Establishment prosperity includes the blessings of privacy and
freedom; the enjoyment of both life and property; protection from crime,
reprisal, violence, and vindictiveness from others; contentment under
national disaster; and acceptance by one’s own peers, whether they like
you or not.

(b) Professional prosperity is maximum success or efficiency in a
profession, whether law, medicine, engineering, science, military,
teaching, law enforcement, athletics, art, music, literature, etc.

(c) Business prosperity, means success in business as an owner or an
executive of a large corporation; or where pertinent, success as a
salesman, administrator, laborer, etc.

(d) Social prosperity is the possession of loving, faithful, reliable,
and stable friends, and maximum enjoyment of your relationships with
them. It is the ability to handle all sorts of social situations. Your
great happiness and enthusiasm for life is expressed both vocally and in
silence with friends.

(e) Mental prosperity is the ability to concentrate; to organize both
your thinking and your life; to synthesize, to analyze; mental courage;
the function of wisdom in the exercise of the intellect; the development
of common sense; and an excellent sense of humor. Mental prosperity
includes freedom from the mental sins of fear, worry, and anxiety. The
development of normality in life comes from thinking objectively. You
will become more observant and aware of others, and therefore not do the
things that hurt them. You will have a relaxed mental attitude and a
true sense of humor.

(f) Cultural prosperity is maximum capacity for good entertainment; the
enjoyment of the best in music, art, literature, drama, history, and
whatever your hobbies, from gardening to astronomy.

(g) Health prosperity is given to some mature believers. But if you have
violated too many principles of health already, you may not have good
health, but you will have the ability to cope with your lack of good
health. This prosperity means nervous energy and nervous stability,
though not necessarily freedom from pain. You can be in good health and
have pain.

(h) Romantic prosperity can mean a wonderful relationship with a member
of the opposite sex. It means freedom from mental attitude and verbal
sins, which are the areas that destroy romance much more than the
obvious overt sins of unfaithfulness and adultery. Romantic prosperity
is perpetuated under all circumstances of life.

(3) Blessing by association.

(a) The spiritual periphery refers to those associated with the mature
believer in the local church, prayer meeting, prep school, mission
board, or in some Christian service organization.

(b) The family periphery refers to those associated with the mature
believer as husband, wife, father, mother, children, relatives, and even
pets.

(c) The social periphery refers to friends associated with the mature
believer.

(d) The geographical periphery refers to those associated with the
mature believer in his neighborhood, city, county, state, or nation.

(e) The professional or business periphery refers to those associated
with the mature believer in business, in schools, on athletic teams,
medical clinics, law firms, law enforcement organizations, engineering
firms, banks, corporations, symphony orchestras, and military
organizations.

(f) There is blessing by association after death. This is called
heritage blessing. Loved ones who are left behind receive the greatest
insurance policy which is provided by association with the mature
believer after his death. Blessing by association continues after the
death of the mature believer; it extends to the next generation, and
sometimes to the third generation.

(g) National Impact of the Invisible Hero. The overflow of wisdom from
the person in spiritual maturity often lands in the national arena. God
has a way of placing mature believers in some rather spectacular places.

· Joseph, Moses, and Daniel are three very good examples of mature
believers having national impact.

· In each case, God placed them where they had a direct effect on the
Pharaoh or king.

(h) International Impact of the Invisible Hero. While mature believers
live in client nations, client nations in time of spiritual prosperity
send out missionaries.

· Missionaries evangelize foreigners in their native lands, and set up
churches from those gospelizing efforts. Those churches grow and produce
mature believers, so that there is now an effective basis for impact
within that country. Because of the missionary, there has been
international impact.

· But statesmen and military men and businessmen may all also have
impact by interacting with foreigners. You may also have international
impact by evangelizing a foreigner on your soil; when they return to
their native land, they bring the gospel and the plan of God with them.
This was the international impact of Solomon on the Queen of Sheba, and
Philip on the Ethiopian Eunuch in Acts chapter eight.

(i) Angelic Impact of the Invisible Hero.

· By advancing to the witness stand in the angelic appeal trial, and
giving an accurate testimony under demonic cross-examination, the mature
believer has wonderful impact in the angelic realm.

· Angelic impact is the greatest category of blessing by association,
and is fantastically rewarded in time and eternity.

Blessings for eternity.

(1) Many of the blessings for time may be transferred into eternity.
When they are, they are greatly multiplied.

(2) The greatest blessing of eternity is the removal of the veil between
the believer and God. 1 Corinthians 13:12, “For now we see in a mirror
dimly, but then face to face; now I know in part, but then I will know
fully just as I also have been fully known.

(3) And yet there are many more blessings that have to do with
recognition: because you have been an invisible hero in this life, God
makes you a visible hero in the next. Mature believers attain instant
celebrity status in the eternal kingdom.

(a) As a result, they wear crowns and pure white garments; they have
statues in the eternal temple and are presented to God by Jesus Christ
in a special honors ceremony; they have special privileges to the
paradise of God and the tree of life.

(b) And all of these things are eternal and never pass away. You have
become a hero forever.

The parable of the pearl of great price, Matthew 13:45-46, “ (45) Again,
the kingdoms of the heavens is like a merchant man seeking fine pearls;
(46) and after finding one pearl of great value, after going forth he
has sold everything which he had, and he bought it.”

This one is remarkably like the last, but is included by Christ in the
same speech for emphasis.

One particular note is that the merchant goes to the point of no return;
he has sold everything which he had. The perfect tense of PIPRASKO
clearly demonstrates that he has irrevocably sold everything of quality
in his possession.

The relative pronoun of quality is HOSA. It shows that he has not sold
all in his possession but everything of quality. In reality, he has had
the ancient equivalent of a garage sale.

The key note of these two parables strikes the same: something valuable
must be exchanged for the greater gain. Let’s examine the potential
sacrifices related to the spiritual life.

Time. It does take a daily investment of time to study the word and
pray. Furthermore, it takes time to operate in Christian service.

Sin. Since the realm of sin is forbidden, all matters of sin must be
surrendered. In essence you must give up the devil’s system in your
life.

The laws of Christian behavior.

(1) Christians are called upon to have a higher standard of behavior
when they are around other people. Two categories of human beings are
affected:

(a) Unbelievers.

(b) Weaker believers.

(2) As ambassadors, we represent the kingdom of heaven to other human
beings, who are not in the plan of God, whether believers or
unbelievers.

(3) So that no ill might be spoken against our home country, the kingdom
of heaven, we are asked to give up certain things while in their
presence.

(4) So that no one outside of the plan of God might use our behavior as
an excuse to stay outside, we are asked to give up certain things while
in their presence.

(5) Although nothing specific is mentioned, anything that is not a sin,
and yet may be considered objectionable are to be surrendered. Naturally
sin should be avoided.

Loss of esteem in the world’s eyes. Being a Christian means enduring
ridicule for your faith. Especially during times when Christians have
stained their own reputations through degeneracy. In times like these,
Christians must endure prejudice.

Lifestyle versus priorities. There are certain legitimate functions of
lifestyle that can be distracting to the priorities of the Christian.
There are hobbies and recreational pursuits that can distract; there are
career paths that are actually destructive to spiritual growth.

Even geographical factors may cause a legitimate distraction.

But in exchange for this, we may pursue a Christ-like life, and leave
behind:

Guilt and regret with reference to sin.

Fear and worry from many causes.

The internalization of stress which leads to health and even mental
health problems.

Anger and bitterness about your handicaps and difficulties in life.

Injustice, because of the guarantee of vindication which we have
received from.

And in exchange for this we gain all of the rewards I have mentioned
above. The relationship with God through Jesus Christ is a pearl of
great price, but the price is much more than worth it.

The Parable of the Dragnet, Matthew 13:47-50, “(47) Again the kingdom of
the heavens is like a dragnet which after being cast into the sea and
after gathering [fish] of every kind; (48) which after it has been
filled, after being dragged up on the beach and after sitting down they
gathered the good into a container, but the rotten they threw out. (49)
So also it will be at the end of the age; the angels will come forth and
take out the evil from the midst of the righteous (50) and cast them
into the furnace of the fire; in that place there will be the weeping
and the gnashing of the teeth.”

Matthew’s employment of the aorist participle gives maximum dramatic
effect. All of these participles (casting, gathering, filling, dragging,
sitting) lead up to the main verbs, which are gathering and throwing
out.

Matthew is repeating what He remembers from Christ’s layout of the
parable. It is in reality Christ’s dramatization. All of the aorist
participles are the every day details of the fisherman’s life. And
remember the setting of these parables - Christ is standing in a boat
and preaching to those on shore. This parable is therefore an excellent
match to the scene and to the audience.

So the fishermen cast a dragnet on the sea and gather fish of every
kind. The net is then full and dragged up on the beach. The fishermen
sit down and gather the good fish into a container but the rotten they
threw out.

This parable reiterates the truth of the parable of the weeds, the
interpretation of which occurs in Matthew 13:36-43.

But here is a strong reminder that there is a judgment at the end of the
age, and that we will be responsible for our decisions. This is the flip
side to the idea of reward.

Yes, there is reward for those who love God; but here is a strong
warning from our Lord - that the unbelievers of the age are cast into
the furnace of fire.

This is the end of the millennial kingdom, where all the unbelievers of
the millennium are gathered up and judged.

They are cast into the furnace of Fire, where there will be [forever]
the weeping and gnashing of teeth.

But the righteous enter into eternal bliss with the Father; they will
shine forth like the sun in the kingdom of the Father.

Imagine the elect angels doing this thing. They have endured the
prehistoric angelic conflict and seen billions of years of degeneracy;
they have also endured the thousands of years of the angelic appeal
trial in human history. They have always stood for what was right, and
they are by the side of God always.

(1) But there is significance here; the angels have to do this, and it
is not done directly by God.

(2) At first thought it seems a grim and even terrible duty. But
whenever God gives a responsibility it is so that His creatures can gain
an appreciation for Him. The angelic creatures will at this moment gain
a great lesson in divine responsibility for creatures.

(3) The elect angels will know many of these unbelievers by name and by
reputation. Perhaps they participated in their lives in some direct
manner. There is no pleasure in this duty; the casting away represents
no failure on the part of God, but rather the end result of a lifetime
of negative volition. But God is not willing that any should perish, and
is not pleased with joy when they do.

(4) It pleases God to do His duty, even when that duty is terrible. Our
execution of criminals under the principle of capital punishment is the
closest that we human beings will ever come to this responsibility.

(5) This also connects the judgment of humanity with the angelic
conflict, and points to the stark reality of that conflict.

The Final Parable, Matthew 13:51-52, “(51) Do you understand all these
things?’ They said to Him, ‘Yes.’ (52) But He said to them, ‘For this
reason every scribe after becoming a disciple in the kingdom of the
heavens is like a man who is the head of a household, who casts out from
his treasury new things and old things.’”

Christ is very earnest to make His disciples understand these things,
and in verse 51 He double checks their understanding.

He requires honesty about their spiritual growth, so that He can assess
whether He needs to communicate more information on the subject of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

The disciples evaluate themselves and all say that they know the
information.

But their reply is so laconic that it seems a little suspicious. They
use the one word answer NAI - Yes.’ Like a teenager’s one word answer,
this could mean trouble. They understand, but they have no great impulse
to discuss the information. Hmmm.

Strengthening this suspicion is Matthew’s employment of the adversative
conjunction DE. Since this immediately follows the disciples’ answer, it
seems that Christ is aiming this last parable at them and specifically
their too quick and too short reply.

This parable concentrates on the Scribes; perhaps there were a few
present in the small circle who listened to these parables.

A scribe who becomes a disciples is like the head of a household, an
OIKODESPOTE. This head of the household is an ANTHROPOS, in contrast
with Matthew 13:27, where the head of the household is the Son of Man,
Jesus Christ (as interpreted in verse 37).

The OIKODESPOTE is the owner and ruler of the house. Although we have
developed a negative way of thinking about a despot, that is not
necessarily included in the original.

The owner of the house goes through his treasury, and casts out new
things and old things. He is getting rid of everything. Perhaps if you
supplant the word ‘basement’ or perhaps ‘attic’ for the word treasury,
you will have a better picture of the idea.

10. The home owner just wants the attic or basement or storage area
clean. This is human nature; suddenly it does not matter whether the
thing in there is new or old; it MUST go! Even new things of value are
tossed out for the sake of cleanliness.

11. Well now this picture describes the repentant scribe just right, and
indeed any repentant person coming from a legalistic background.

12. In cleaning the attic of their soul, they are prone to discard the
valuable things of old. Think of a moral scribe who casts out his
morality as a part of the house cleaning of repentance; think of an
expert in the Law of Moses who tosses out his knowledge of the
Scriptures. Of course there are many valuable pieces of knowledge that
the Scribe could safely retain as parts of his every day spiritual life.

13. The Scribe would need to switch his motivation, and make a few
rearrangements with regard to doctrine; he would need to revitalize his
spiritual walk so that he communicated to God much more often. But throw
everything out? Not necessary; even foolhardy.

14. The Gentile, the one who is locked into the lascivious lawlessness
side of the spiritual realm and who has little or no prior knowledge of
God, this one must throw out much more.

15. Now how is this parable the response to Christ’s disciples too quick
reply to His question?

They have responded too quickly, perhaps, for His taste, and He is
unsure of the honesty of their statement.

He is obviously looking at some former Scribes and legalists as He makes
this statement.

And this reply is like saying, “You think you know everything but you
don’t.”

The former Scribes in this audience are prone to have thrown all their
knowledge out of the attic of their brains. Therefore if they say they
have understood anything, it is a danger that they have understood
nothing. Christ wants them to think again.

III. A Summary of the Parables and Their Meaning.

The parable of the seeds. “An evangelist goes out to evangelize.
Sometimes the gospel goes to those who are not interested, and refuse to
perceive the information beyond the point of polite listening, if that.
Soon they have forgotten they ever heard it, and refuse to listen any
more. Sometimes the gospel goes to someone who immediately receives it
with joy, but refuses to grow; persecution comes on account of their
faith, and God allows the persecution because they have had a fair
amount of time in which to prepare for it. Their persecution destroys
their faith, and they are Christians who turn out to have no effect on
the world. Sometimes the gospel goes to those who receive it and even
grow in the initial phase of their walk with God. But later they become
distracted by the many cares of this world, and so they fall away from
their relationship with God. And then there are those few who take their
faith seriously and keep their priorities straight; these are the ones
who fulfill the plan of God, and as mature believers have a tremendous
impact on the world around them. Through them many come to believe and
advance.

The parable of the growth of the seed. As givers of the gospel we do not
have to know all of the details of someone’s response. We are the
workers, and we must do our duty unto God. The details of why one
believes and another creates excuses should not matter to us. Don’t get
involved in excuses; just give the information.

The parable of the weeds. It is never the place of the gospel giver to
judge the one who rejects. That will always remain the business of Jesus
Christ, who is the only qualified judge for all men. We are never to
cast final judgment over anyone’s life as long as they are alive, for
that life represents opportunity.

The parable of the mustard seed. From that obscure day when we receive
the gospel comes great things. The gospel grows inside of us through the
daily pursuit of the word, so that our relationship with God becomes
very powerful. And our lives become restful places for many who are
tired from living in the devil’s world. They gravitate to us because of
our love for God, and because we are a shady rest to them. From this
powerful relationship with God comes much impact on the weary and
heavy-laden of this world.

The parable of the leavened bread. We are in this world to give impact.
It is the devil’s world, but we have the possibility of changing history
through the gospel. That is God’s intent through our lives. The presence
of even one mature believer can make a tremendous difference in the
lives of many.

The parables of the treasure in the field and the pearl of great price.
We are asked to sacrifice much for the sake of our everyday walks with
God. It is worth every bit of sacrifice that we have to offer, for what
we have gained in salvation and what we will gain in eternal reward
makes it worth it.

The parable of the dragnet. Be sober in regard to your spiritual walk,
for you, too, will undergo judgment. The consequences of that judgment
may be grave indeed.

The parable of the homeowner. Be careful that you do not throw out good
things with bad when you enter the plan of God. As a believer from a
legalistic background you may be tempted to throw out the good things
from your heritage, but it is wrong to do so.

Calming the Storm
-----------------

Matthew 13:53: “And it came about when Jesus finished these parables, He
left there.

Matthew 8:18: Now Jesus, after seeing the crowds around Him gave orders
to depart for the other side.

Matthew 8:23-27: (23) And after embarking with Him into the boat, the
disciples followed Him. (24) And behold! A great shaking (SEISMOS)
occurred on the sea, so as to swamp the boat by the waves, but He
Himself was sleeping. (25) and after coming to Him, they woke Him
saying, ‘Lord, save! We are perishing!’ (26) And He says to them, ‘Why
are you cowardly, little faiths?’ Then after rising He rebuked the winds
and the sea and there came about a great calm. (27) Now the men
marveled, saying, ‘What sort of man is He that the winds and the sea
obey Him?’

Mark 4:35-41, “(35) And He says to them on that day, after evening had
come, ‘Let us pass through [the sea] unto the other side.’ (36) And
after leaving the crowd they [the fishermen] took Him along since He was
[already] in the boat, and other boats were with it. (37) and there came
about a great gale of wind and the waves were cast over into the boat,
so as to almost fill the boat. (38) And He Himself was in the stern upon
the pillow sleeping. And they woke Him and they said to Him, ‘Teacher,
is it not a concern for You that we are perishing?’ (39) And after being
aroused, He rebuked the wind and said to the sea, ‘Hush, be silenced.’
and the wind abated and there came a great calm. (40) And He said to
them, ‘Why are you cowards? Do none of you have faith?’ (41) And they
were afraid with great fear and were saying to one another, ‘Who then is
this, that even the wind and the sea obey Him?’”

Luke 8:22-25, “(22) And it came about in one of those days that He and
His disciples entered a boat and said to them, “Let us go over to the
other side of the lake.’ And they were launched out. (23) Now as they
were sailing He fell asleep… [ominous musical theme] And a gale force
wind came down into the lake and were continually being swamped and
continually in danger. (24) And after coming [to Him] they roused Him
saying, ‘Stand up, stand up, we are perishing!’ And after waking up He
rebuked the wind and the wave of the water; and they stopped and it
became calm. (25) And He said to them, ‘Where is your faith?’ And after
being afraid they marveled saying to one another, ‘Who then is this man
that He commands even the winds and the water, and they obey Him?’”

Outline.

The circumstances regarding their departure for the far side of the Sea
of Galilee.

The pressure of the crowds.

The convenience of the boat.

The event of the storm.

The advent and danger of the storm.

Christ’s disposition during the storm.

The disciple’s reaction to the storm and rousing of Christ.

Christ’s response to their reaction.

The calm.

Christ’s rebuke of the disciples.

The fear of the disciples and their doubts.

Exposition.

Introduction.

This storm represents a great confused jumble of thoughts and ideas
coming from three different sources, two of whom represent eyewitnesses
and a third who interviewed other eyewitnesses for his story.

There is further confusion because Matthew has rearranged his material
and departed from the chronological arrangement of the other gospels.
Because of this, his gospel records the events in three different places
and from two different chapters. It is only because of the work of Mark
and Luke that we can draw chronological order from the chaos of
Matthew’s arrangement efforts.

In the midst of a crisis, even people who were only a few feet from the
others may differ in the order of events and even the substance of the
points of the crisis. The three gospels have some of those confusing
elements, but through the miracle of inspiration, you can see that they
harmonize into a cohesive account.

We can be thankful for the harmony, because it reveals the big picture,
an advantage that a single gospel would not have.

A related principle is that every crime is a crisis, and the
two-eyewitness system is necessary because of the frailty of human
perception in the midst of the many confusing events of a crisis.

The circumstances regarding their departure for the far side of the Sea
of Galilee.

The pressure of the crowds.

Christ finished His parables, from Matthew 13:53, “And it came about
when Jesus finished these parables, He left there.” As you may recall,
He gave these parables from a fishing boat just off the shore of the Sea
of Galilee. The crowds were arrayed on the beach before Him. He finished
His parables, and had to make a decision on what to do next.

Christ surveyed the crowds before Him, and determined that it would be
best to leave for the other side, Matthew 8:18, “Now Jesus, after seeing
the crowds around Him gave orders to depart for the other side.”

His exact words come from Mark 4:35, “And He says to them on that day,
after evening had come, ‘Let us pass through [the sea] unto the other
side.”

(1) Our Lord gave a polite command in the form of the hortatory
subjunctive verb DIELTHOMEN.

(2) With this verb, Jesus Christ exhorted His disciples to undertake
this course of action. He wanted very much to do this.

(a) But you should know that this does not represent a weakness or
cowardice on the part of Christ.

(b) Christ did not make decisions based on weakness. He was not afraid
of the crowd, nor was He tired of the crowd; they were simply in the way
of what He wanted to do.

(3) Luke’s gospel confirms the hortatory subjunctive in 8:22, “And it
came about in one of those days that He and His disciples entered a boat
and said to them, “Let us go over to the other side of the lake.’ And
they were launched out.”

The convenience of the boat.

In Mark’s gospel there is a little mystery that tempts us to conclude
that there is a contradiction. Verse 36 says, “And after leaving the
crowd they [the fishermen] took Him along since He was [already] in the
boat, and other boats were with it.”

The verb PARALAMBANO means to take someone along with you on a journey
of some sort. If you assume that the disciples have said this, then it
appears that they are leaving at their initiative and not Christ’s.

But the subject of the verb is not made clear by Mark - he left it out,
because he thought it would be obvious to the readers. And indeed it
should be - the owners of the boats are the obvious subjects of the
verb.

The owners of the boats perceived that Christ was already in the boat,
and that they were already going to the other side of the Sea, and so
they decided to take Him along.

With this convenience at hand, the disciples then embarked into the boat
and followed Him, Matthew 8:23.

The event of the storm.

The advent and danger of the storm.

As they were sailing, Christ fell asleep, Luke 8:23.

(1) Luke 8:23 has a premonitory genitive absolute. Here the genitive
absolute functions as an ominous musical theme to tell us that something
terrible is about to happen. PLEONTON DE AUTON APHUPNOSEN.

(2) Premonitory means that the grammatical structure functions as a
premonition for the readers, warning them that in spite of the
tranquility of the present scene, there is danger about. This was a
common construction employed by Luke before the Pharisees and the
Scribes would enter the scene.

Then a storm suddenly comes up, and remember, it was night. Weathering a
terrible storm at night in a sailing vessel can be a terrifying
experience.

Matthew 8:24 describes the surprising nature of the storm with a single
word: IDOU. This was the Greek word which expressed surprise. It is
translated ‘Behold.’

Luke identifies the source of the wind as coming down onto the lake in
verse 23 of the eighth chapter of his gospel. The verb KATABAINO means
‘descend.’ The wind swept down from the hills around the lake.

The wind itself was a great gale.

(1) Mark and Luke agree with reference to vocabulary: it is a LAILAPS
ANEMOU in Luke, and a LAILAPS MEGALE ANEMOU in Mark. The LAILAPS is a
gale. It would be mistaken to label this a hurricane or a tornado since
neither of those phenomena occur in the region. It was a great gale of
wind.

(2) Matthew says a great shaking occurred. Peter and Luke were used to
boats, and they both knew how to describe this phenomenon with the
correct vocabulary. Here Matthew identifies himself as a landlubber,
because he employs the word SEISMOS to describe his own experience on
the boat. SEISMOS means ‘earthquake’ in the Greek. Matthew experiences
an earthquake at sea - of sorts. He has ridden out an earthquake before,
and this storm at sea is the closest thing to that experience.

All three gospel writers agree that the boat was on the verge of being
swamped by the waves of the sea. The waves were coming over the rail of
the boat, and causing it to founder. Luke 8:23 adds: “[those in the
boat] were continually in danger.” The verb EKINDUNEUON is in the
imperfect tense, portraying a past action in a continual state. They
were in a continual state of physical danger from the storm. The danger
was real.

During the winter months on the Sea of Galilee, the owners of small
fishing vessels did not often go very far out on the water. The storms
could muster quickly and be quite deadly. There was a certain amount of
lore regarding these storms and the men who had been lost in them.

Christ’s disposition during the storm.

But Christ had fallen asleep, and even during the storm He remained
asleep.

Christ was also a landlubber. Remember that He was a carpenter from the
Galilean hill country to the west. He would not have been used to the
boats at all, and yet He is completely relaxed during this calamity.
Even with the boat rocking and the waves passing over the rails and
swamping the boat, He was still asleep.

Mark records in 4:38 that Christ was in the stern. The preposition EN
goes beyond a simple riding function as we understand it. Often in
English in the stern means on the stern. Here it means in the stern in a
more literal sense. There must have been a small cabin, or at least an
overhang. From archaeology we know that a typical boat on the sea of
Galilee during the time was about 27 feet in length. Hardly a large
boat, but certainly enough length to accommodate a small cabin.

So there is Christ in the boat, and it is rocking and swaying violently,
but His head is on a pillow or cushion, and He is still fast asleep.

The disciple’s reaction to the storm and rousing of Christ.

Apparently, the disciples saw the situation as hopeless, and so they
went back to the cabin or overhang in the stern of the boat.

There are three versions to what the disciples actually said:

(1) Matthew: “Lord, save! We are perishing!”

(2) Mark: “Teacher, is it not a concern for You that we are perishing?”

(a) This is arguably a funny thing to say, since it seems so dignified.

(b) Consider that the ultimate source is Peter, and he was easily the
most excitable of all the disciples, this is interesting.

(c) Were it not for the fact that we know this to be inspired, we would
question its veracity.

(d) But someone among them had a cool head.

(3) Luke: “Stand up, stand up, we are perishing!”

I would say that since all three are equally true, the scene plays like
this: the disciples go in and rouse Christ; as He wakes, at least three
of them blurt out these things at the same time. You can only imagine
the confusion that was part of this scene.

Christ’s response to their reaction.

Christ first has words for the disciples, “Why are you cowardly, little
faiths.”

(1) DEILOI is the first of the two descriptive terms that Christ
inveighs against the disciples. It is the coward. The disciples are
afraid that they might die, and this has affected their thinking.

(2) OLIGOPISTOI is the second. It is a derisive term that is literally
translated ‘little faith.’ You should perceive this as an almost
child-like word employed in a taunt. Christ is prodding His disciples
with this word.

(a) This word also occurs in Matthew 6:30, “But if God so clothes the
grass of the field, which is alive today and tomorrow is thrown into the
furnace, will He not much more clothe you, little faith?”

(b) And again in Matthew 14:31, where Peter doubts as he is attempting
to walk on the water like Christ - “Immediately Jesus stretched out His
hand and took hold of him, and said to him, ‘Little faith, why did you
doubt?’”

(3) So you can imagine that this is in the middle of a great crisis and
the boat is about to sink, and the storm is roaring and the boat is
shaking, and the disciples are shouting altogether at Christ… and Christ
takes time to rebuke His disciples for their lack of faith.

And then Christ has words for the storm. He rises then rebukes the
storm.

(1) The verb is EPITIMAO, and it means to speak words harshly; to go
beyond an honorable mode of speaking.

(2) The actual words that Christ spoke are contained only Mark’s gospel,
chapter four and verse 39: SIOPA, PEPHIMOSO. They are really quite close
in meaning.

(a) The first is almost always spoken to a person, and it is designed to
get them to stop talking. The present imperative here commands the
person to stop talking, and to stay silent continuously.

(b) The second comes from PHIMOO, but is a command to a third party to
silence a different person who is talking out of place. This is the
perfect imperative, which is very powerful, and essentially comes to
mean, ‘stop forever.’

(c) The first is Christ talking to the storm like the storm is a person.
The second is Christ commanding a third person to silence the storm.
Herein lies some theological trivia.

· Storms can be the domain of God, if He chooses to intervene with
testing by means of a storm.

- Listen to Psalm 148:8, “Fire and hail, snow and clouds; stormy wind,
fulfilling His word.”

- Also Isaiah 28:2 has something to say, “Behold, the Lord has a strong
and mighty agent; as a storm of hail, a tempest of destruction, like a
storm of might overflowing waters, He has cast it down to the earth with
his hand.”

- Revelation 7:1 reveals that angels are the agents of the storm, “After
this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth,
holding back the four winds of the earth, so that no wind would blow on
the earth or on the sea or on any tree.”

· God also provides protection in the midst of the storm.

- Isaiah 4:6, There will be a shelter to give shade from the heat by
day, and refuge and protection from the storm and the rain.”

- Isaiah 25:4 also testifies, “For You have been a defense for the
helpless, a defense for the needy in his distress, a refuge from the
storm, a shade from the heat; for the breath of the ruthless is like a
rain storm against a wall.”

· But take note: this planet is the devil’s world; the enemy of all that
is good may cause harm through a storm. Listen to these passages:

- Job 1:12, “Then the Lord said to Satan, ‘Behold, all that he has is in
your power, only do not put forth your hand on him.’ So Satan departed
from the presence of the Lord.”

- And now examine Job 1:18-19, “(18) While he was still speaking (the
messenger to Job), another also came and said, ‘Your sons and your
daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house,
(19) and behold, a great wind came from across the wilderness and struck
the four corners of the house, and it fell on the young people and they
died, and I alone have escaped to tell you.’”

· So you can perceive that the weather on our planet is much more than
just a system of random winds and precipitation; it is often bent to a
purpose by angels, both fallen and elect. It is no wonder, then, that it
is so difficult to be a weather man!

· Our Lord was cognizant of these facts, because He was a supreme expert
on Old Testament doctrines. Based on this knowledge, Jesus Christ could
sleep through a storm.

· The command was first for the benefit of the disciples - Christ was
talking to the storm as though it were a person.

· And then the second command is directly to the elect angels in charge
of the storm.

· This storm was certainly present for a spiritual reason, and the
disciples, being ignorant of Old Testament doctrine, failed to
understand that.

(d) This was a prayer; and commands in prayers are not all that
uncommon.

· Consider the Lord’s prayer, which has several commands.

· “Give us today our logistical bread…’ This contains the aorist
imperative of the verb DIDOMI. And this is how we are supposed to pray.
In prayer you may command God.

· “Forgive us our trespasses…” This also has an aorist imperative, this
time from APHIEMI.

As a result, a great calm came over the waters. Mark describes the
happening with the verb GINOMAI, which tells us that the calm appeared
out of nowhere (but we know the reason) What a tremendous contrast!
First the storm and then the calm. No wonder it is described as a great
calm. So there they were on the suddenly glassy sea, without a whisper
of wind. The disciples would have been standing in front of Christ,
bedraggled and dripping wet, and really appearing quite silly in sight
of the circumstances.

The calm.

Christ’s rebuke of the disciples.

Before the disciples could say “Holy Mackerel” or some other appropriate
statement of utter surprise, Christ speaks.

He says, “Why are you cowards? Do none of you have faith?”

This is an appropriate reiteration of the statement of only moments
before. So Christ says it while the storm is raging, then He calms the
storm, and then He says it again in the silence. This was certainly a
calculated strategy. How truly effective it must have been! What impact
those words must have had!

The rebuke strikes at the faith of the disciples.

(1) Remember that faith is based on truth; you need information on which
to place your faith, before you can exercise it.

(2) Had the disciples understood the principle of the storm, they would
have been able to relax and sleep under the stern shelter with Christ.

(3) And this faith is supposed to replace fear. The juxtaposition of
fear and faith shows that faith casts out fear.

(4) 1 John 4:18 says it in another way, “There is no fear in love; but
perfect love casts out fear, because fear involves punishment, and the
one who fears is not perfected in love.”

(5) We should conclude then, that love contains faith; that is, love is
a complex of truth in the soul. Metabolized truth directed toward God in
a personal way. Our personal love from God is only developed through our
study of the truth.

(6) 1 Corinthians 13:1-3 implies that love is the application of all
truth in the context of personal love for God, “(1) If I speak with the
tongues of men and of angels, but do not have love, I have become a
noisy gong or a clanging symbol. (2) If I have the gift of prophecy, and
know all mysteries and all knowledge; and if I have all faith, so as to
remove mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing. (3) And if I give
all my possessions to feed the poor, and if I surrender my body to be
burned, but do not have love, it profits me nothing.”

But this rebuke bears no immediate results…

The fear of the disciples and their doubts.

The disciples failed to understand this prayer of Christ’s.

They marveled, according to Matthew 8:27. The verb is THAUMAZO, and it
means to consider something with a mental attitude of awe. Something has
occurred here that gave the disciples an appreciation of awesome power
at work.

Mark puts it a different way with his gospel; He says, EPHOBETHESAN
PHOBON MEGAN, ‘they were afraid with great fear.’

(1) This tells us immediately that they were failing with regard to
faith and love, because faith and love drive out fear. Their fear was
based on ignorance and failed application.

(2) Christ’s exhortation went right over their heads, and the fear of
the storm was transferred to a fear of Christ Himself, who to them had
commanded the storm.

(3) Christ in reality had placed the situation in the Father’s hands
with great confidence, and the elect weather angels took care of the
rest.

(4) Now the disciples ignorance about the storm has been compounded by
their ignorance of Christ.

They say, “Who is this, then, that even the wind and the sea obey Him?”

(1) It is as if they no longer know Christ; as if this incident has
confused them about Him completely.

(2) But something does not settle well with this conclusion: the
disciples had already witnessed many miracles from Christ.

(a) He had healed and done miracles.

(b) He had even cast out demons, demonstrating His authority through the
Spirit over them.

(c) So you have to ask, ‘What is the big deal about another miracle?’
Indeed, had they forgotten their own wilderness history? Wasn’t there a
supernatural pillar of cloud guiding Israel every day on their way
through the desert journey?

(d) There was. So this should be no surprise and certainly no cause for
fear.

Some additional thoughts on application.

We do not have the authority to command angels. But we certainly have
authority in prayer to call upon God, and to command Him in matters that
we are certain.

Christ called upon God here; and God commanded His angels to stop the
wind and the storm.

Christ in the state of kenosis could not employ His deity to stop the
storm Himself. That would have been a breach of integrity with regard to
the rules of the incarnation.

It is not we who command the weather angels. Rather, it is our
responsibility to put things in the Lord’s hands.

When the inclement weather comes your way, you must remember that there
is one of two possibilities:

It is your time to go home to heaven.

God will protect you through the storm.

The Demons and the Swine
------------------------

Matthew 8:28-34

Mark 5:1-20

Luke 8:26-39.

Outline.

The Setting, “And they sailed down to the other side, into the country
of the Gadarenes and Gerasenes, which is opposite of Galilee…”

The Attack of the Demon-possessed Men:

The timing of their attack, “And immediately after He disembarked from
the boat and came out onto the land, two men from the city who were
demon-possessed opposed Him while coming out of the tombs…”

The description of the primary attacker, “[he was] exceedingly violent
and had not put on any clothing for a long time; he was not living in a
house, but in the tombs. And on one was able to bind him any longer with
a chain, because he had been bound many times with shackles and chains
and kept under guard, and the chains and shackles had been torn apart
him and torn in pieces, and driven by the demons into the desert; and no
one was able to subdue him, so that some were not strong [enough] to
pass through that road. Through the whole night and day he was in the
tombs and in the mountains crying out and cutting himself with stones.”

The demons’ first entreaty of Christ, “Now seeing Jesus from afar he ran
and bowed down before Him, and behold! Crying out in a loud voice [the
demons], they said, ‘What is for me and for you (this is not your
affair), Son of the Most High God? Do You come here before the appointed
time to torment us? We implore You by God, do not torment us!’ For He
was commanding the unclean spirits to come out from the man.”

Christ’s response to the first entreaty, “And Jesus interrogated him,
saying, ‘What is your name?’ And he says to Him, ‘Legion, because we are
many.’”

The second entreaty of the demons, “And they were exhorting Him not to
order them to enter into the abyss. And there was on the mountain far
away a herd of many swine, feeding. And the demons exhorted Him, saying,
‘If You cast us out, send us into the herd of swine, so that we might
enter into them.’”

Christ’s granting of the desire, and the result, “And he allowed them
and said to them, ‘Go.’ And after the demons had left the man they
entered into the swine, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the
sea, about two thousand, and they were drowned in the sea.”

The response of the swineherds, “And the swineherds fled them and
announced everything and especially the things about the demon-possessed
men to the [people of the ] city and to the countryside.”

The reaction of the city folk, “And the people of the city came out to
see what was happening, and they came to Jesus and found the man from
whom the legion of demons had been cast out sitting down at the feet of
Jesus, clothed and mentally well, and they were afraid.”

The report of the eyewitnesses to the city folk, “And the ones who saw
[it happen] reported to them how the demon-possessed man was saved, and
about the swine.”

The judgment of the people, “And all the people of the surrounding
countryside of the Gerasenes asked Him to leave from their mountain,
because they were seized with great fear; and after embarking into the
boat He returned.”

The entreaty of the formerly possessed man, “And while He embarked into
the boat the man who had been demon-possessed exhorted Him so that He
might be with him.”

Christ’s reply, “And He did not allow him, but He said to him, ‘Go into
your house with your own [family] and announce to them what sort of
things the Lord has done for you and what sort of mercy He has done for
you.’

The man’s obedience, “And he went away preaching in each city of the
Decapolis what sort of things Jesus did for him, and everyone marveled.”

II. The Exposition.

The Setting, “And they sailed down to the other side, into the country
of the Gadarenes and Gerasenes, which is opposite of Galilee…”

If you recall Christ and the disciples have just weathered a terrible
storm at sea. As they walk off the boat, some of the disciples no doubt
were tempted to kiss the dry land. But their period of ordeal is not
over just yet.

There is a difference between the account of Matthew, and Mark and
Luke’s accounts. Matthew names the country as that of the Gadarenes,
while Mark and Luke name it as the Gerasenes.

Both of these regions lie in the Decapolis, the ‘ten cities’ region that
was east of the Jordan River and populated mainly by gentiles.

All three identify the event as happening right next to the Sea of
Galilee; the accounts are so similar in other key aspects that they can
hardly be separated from one another. They are indeed the same event.

The reason for the difference is more difficult to ascertain, but there
is an answer that allows us to guard the inerrancy of the text.

(1) These two regions were Greek city-states within the Decapolis. In
fact, each of the ten cities were.

(2) Gadara is one of the city-states that bordered on the Sea of
Galilee, Gerasa was a long way from there to the southeast; maybe thirty
miles or so.

(3) Because these were small city-states, the borders were never very
exact; furthermore, Gerasa was one of the more important of the ten, and
is one of the best preserved archaeologically today.

(4) When Mark and Luke make their statements, they are referring to the
Gerasene region as a synonym for the Decapolis; as the most vital city
of the region, its name would inevitably become associated with the
entire area, and therefore it would encompass the smaller region of
Gadara, where the event actually took place.

So they get off the boat, no doubt exhausted from their ordeal at sea;
wet, bedraggled, and glad to be ashore. They may be vulnerable…

The Attack of the Demon-possessed Men:

The timing of their attack, “And immediately after He disembarked from
the boat and came out onto the land, two men from the city who were
demon-possessed opposed Him while coming out of the tombs…”

Mark employs the adjective EUTHUS to tell us that this happened right
after they left the boat.

Christ came out the boat and onto the land, and two men approached.

Now Matthew’s gospel records that there were two demon-possessed men,
and the other two writers only one.

(1) Matthew remembered a second, silent man who was not significant to
the narrative, but present nonetheless.

(2) The others may have remembered, but since he said nothing left him
out.

(3) In any event the silent second man did not figure at all in the
later narrative, and even Matthew does not mention him again.

These men were from the city. The nearest city of the Decapolis was
Hippo, a city right on the Eastern shore of Galilee. It is most likely
that they were from there, because the city must be right on the shore,
and neither Gerasa nor Gadara fit the bill for that.

Again let me emphasize that the difference in the region names does not
necessarily place the Bible in error. An analogy to this situation might
come from our own United States.

(1) The Decapolis was the equivalent of our own nation. The main city of
the Decapolis was Gerasa, and that would equal our own Washington D.C.

(2) Gerasa and the Decapolis became interchangeable terms for the
nation.

(3) But there were also states within this nation. The Gerasene state,
with Gerasa at the center, and the Gadarene state with Gadara as its
central city.

(4) Down at the shore of the Sea of Galilee there was the small town of
Hippo, one of the ten city-states of the Decapolis; just to the south of
this little town was the border of Gadara.

(5) The event took place in the nation of Decapolis, also known as the
greater region of Gerasa. But the actual place was in the state-region
of Gadara, and on top of that, the nearest town was Hippo, even though
the town itself was in another state-region.

The description of the primary attacker, “[he was] exceedingly violent
and had not put on any clothing for a long time; he was not living in a
house, but in the tombs. And no one was able to bind him any longer with
a chain, because he had been bound many times with shackles and chains
and kept under guard, and the chains and shackles had been torn apart
him and torn in pieces, and driven by the demons into the desert; and no
one was able to subdue him, so that some were not strong [enough] to
pass through that road. Through the whole night and day he was in the
tombs and in the mountains crying out and cutting himself with stones.”

First, this demon-possessed man was CHALEPOI LIAN - exceedingly violent.

(1) The adjective CHALEPOI describes a hard man - like a hardened
criminal. Sometimes this simply referred to personality, and at other
times it had the implication of violence.

(2) This word is further modified by an adjective which was reserved for
extreme occasions. It is ‘exceedingly.’ This was an exceedingly hard and
violent man. He was dangerous indeed.

(3) And by the way, this information could only have come after the
fact; Christ and His disciples could not have known any of these details
as this naked man approached them.

(4) So here is the situation, they climb off the boat, and there are two
men approaching them, at least one of whom is naked. And of course
Christ is thinking, ‘There’s something you don’t see every day.’

Second, Luke notes that he had not put on any clothing in a long time.
The long time here is a little vague, as it could denote weeks, months,
or years.

(1) The weather outside was cool, since it was likely winter. This only
points out the superhuman strength of a demon-possessed man, something
which will become even more evident in a moment.

(2) But perhaps something more is here. The demons desired to convey the
idea of a truly demented human being and intimidate anyone from coming
around the area of operations.

Third, Mark and Luke identify that the man had his house among the
tombs.

(1) This lends a spooky air to the scene. The man lives among the dead -
how very ghoulish! Too bad this isn’t a Halloween sermon!

(2) But there is a reason for everything; the demons inside this man
don’t live in the tombs because the dead are better at conversation!

(3) Again, I believe there is an intimidation factor here. The demons
know that this will strike fear into the hearts of the superstitious
unbelievers who inhabit this region.

(4) Remember that the people on this side of the Sea of Galilee are
gentiles. They are unbelievers with no background in Bible truth at all.
They would be especially vulnerable to this kind of behavior.

(5) The demons inside this man are quite clever, and they have an agenda
to intimidate the people in the surrounding area. This is their idea of
entertainment.

(6) With this pattern, it is clear to see that these demons are locked
into a system of power lust. Demon-possessed people often represent this
pattern. Adolf Hitler was almost certainly an example of this; Saddam
Hussein may be another.

(7) Other demons follow other patterns of lust; this one wanted to
dominate the people of his region through fear and intimidation. He
wanted them to fear him utterly.

Fourth, the local populace had made efforts to restrain him, but the
demons inside the man caused him to have superhuman strength.

(1) They bound him with chains and shackles and placed him under guard.

(2) Each time, the demons inside the man would strengthen him, and cause
him to break the chains in pieces and tear off the shackles. He would
then defeat his guard, and the demons would impel him out into the
surrounding arid wilderness.

(3) This piece of information is here so that we will understand that
Christ succeeded in solving a problem that a city and even a region
could not.

(4) The human efforts of these unbelievers cannot cope with a spiritual
problem. This is true in a more general sense. An unbeliever who is lost
in sin is completely helpless to remedy the problem of total depravity.

(5) Where the human efforts to solve the problem had completely failed,
Christ would succeed and amaze the failures.

(6) It is curious to see that these locals did not kill this
demon-possessed man. He was causing so much havoc and he had likely
paralyzed trade in the region, because he shut down a road.

(7) There were three major north-south roads in the region. All ten of
the cities of the Decapolis lay on these roads. If this man managed to
shut down one of those road, then trade would have been curtailed quite
significantly.

(8) There was really only one reason for these ten cities to exist, and
that had to do with trade. These towns were the road-side stands of the
desert region. The modern equivalent would be the southwestern gas
station or curios shop. If the road no longer ran through there, the
town would be in a desperate situation.

(9) Even at the threat of their own lifestyle, they would not kill this
man to remove his threat. They tried binding him and guarding him, but
that failed.

Fifth, he was in the tombs and mountains crying out and cutting himself
with stones.

(1) Again, the self-mutilation is designed to intimidate. This behavior
is so bizarre that people did not dare even approach the man.

(2) The present participles here denote actions that were constant; he
was always doing these things. The self-mutilation had a purpose of
intimidation; it certainly follows the pattern of everything else these
demons were doing in this man.

(3) Because the mutilation was constant, he would have been a bloody
mess at all times. How intimidating indeed to see a naked, bloody,
shouting man living in the graveyard and having broken shackles and
chains on his body!

The demons’ first entreaty of Christ, “Now seeing Jesus from afar he ran
and bowed down before Him, and behold! Crying out in a loud voice [the
demons], they said, ‘What is for me and for you (this is not your
affair), Son of the Most High God? Do You come here before the appointed
time to torment us? We implore You by God, do not torment us!’ For He
was commanding the unclean spirits to come out from the man.”

Mark’s gospel records that they saw Jesus from afar. There was immediate
recognition of Jesus.

(1) Now, they did not know that Christ was on His way in any
supernatural fashion. They had to use the faculty of sight in order to
do so.

(2) But they saw Him from afar, and knew immediately that the man
getting out of the boat was the Messiah and the Son of the Most High
God.

(3) Realizing that His presence endangered their scam, the demons are
anxious to attempt to ward Him away.

(4) The demons impelled this man to run up from afar, and of course the
approach of a bloody, chain-dragging, shouting, naked man would startle
anyone.

(5) Would he attack? Was he in need of help? Had he been robbed and
beaten? It was impossible to know.

(6) Christ held His ground, and at the last moment the man stopped and
bowed down at His feet, and began to beg Christ.

(7) All the accounts agree that the man cried out with a loud voice.
This entreaty has the force of a crying out loud man’s voice.

(8) The first thing spoken is word for word in all three gospels: TI
EMOI KAI SOI. It is literally, ‘what is for me and for you.’ But this is
an idiom. It really means, ‘this is none of your business,’ or, ‘what is
my business is not your business.’

(a) The demons want to make it clear that they have staked out their own
territory, and that they have an operation going on that Christ should
not interfere with.

(b) The demons are most anxious and begging because they have invested
no little amount of time and effort into the domination of the region.

(c) But why should they say this to Christ? Why would they believe that
anything is not His business?

(d) As the events turn out, Christ concludes that it is His business,
and more than that, He intervenes. It seems the demons were wrong as to
their conclusion.

(e) There is one important conclusion that we can derive from this
statement: demons, though they are vastly intelligent beings, are
susceptible to self-deception and blindness.

(f) Here these demons had gone to great pains to get their operation
going with this man, and now they were beginning to exert power over
this gentile region.

(g) They have deceived themselves to believe that this is not the domain
of God, and that since it was Satan’s world, they could operate freely.

(h) Furthermore, they naively attempt to bring Christ into their world
of deception. He is not going to buy it.

(9) After the initial appeal, the demons address our Lord as ‘Son of the
Most High God.’ Even they recognize this…

(a) But there is a fawning sort of attitude here; these demons hate
Christ and all that He represents. There is no respect in this
appellation at all.

(b) The demons recognize their impotence here, and so become
sycophantic, kissing up to Christ.

(c) They also perceive Him as temptable and deceivable. This reveals
that the demons are participating in this spiritual conflict as though
there is true free will in the person of Christ.

(d) Furthermore, the demons have lived before human history; there would
be soul memory related to angelic prehistory and the relationship with
the Godhead at that time.

(e) These fallen angels know for a fact that free will is not a sham,
and that Christ in His humanity is temptable. They always act like it,
and they have an awful lot at stake in this spiritual conflict.

(f) What I am saying is that the demons were not wrong in the fact that
Christ Himself had free will.

(10) After this lofty address, they demons provide support for their
appeal. It is their very nature to act as lawyers… “Do You come here
before the appointed time to torment us? We implore You by God, do not
torment us!’”

(a) The appointed time is the time of the judgment of the fallen angels
at the judgment of Christ.

(b) Although the sentence is passed on the fallen angels in prehistory,
it is not carried out until the great white throne at the end of human
history.

· Matthew 25:41, “Then he will also say to those on His left, ‘Depart
from Me, accursed ones, into the eternal fire which has been prepared
for the devil and his angels…”

· Revelation 20:10, “And the devil who deceived them was thrown into the
lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are
also; and they will be tormented day and night forever and ever.”

(c) These demons understand that they have a certain amount of time
before their sentence will be passed, and that they have a certain
amount of leeway to operate before then.

(d) The reason for the freedom to operate has to do with the angelic
conflict; the ostensible reason that demons participate in human
history.

(e) The demons implore Christ by God. That is, they think they are in
the right with regard to this matter; they believe they have the freedom
to do what they are doing with this man.

· The verb HORKIZO has a legal connotation; it means to adjure or
implore someone by invoking a legal precedent or a legal authority.

· They have a long history of interaction with Christ, probably billions
of years. And here they are arguing again. They think they are right,
and they are seeking justice from a man who has the power to ruin their
lives.

(f) They ask Christ not to torment them.

· The verb for torment is BASANIZO, and it also has a legal connotation;
it is the torture that one endures while being cross-examined.

· There is also a physical torture associated with this word, rather
like the inquisition, where physical pain was associated with a
confession of Christ.

· But what kind of torture would Christ bring down on these fallen
angels? Aren’t they already condemned to an eternity in the lake of
fire?

· Part of the answer lies in the next statement, which explains that
Jesus was casting them out as the man approached.

· Later in the narrative we will discover that there is a ‘legion’ of
demons in this man, maybe up to two thousand in all.

· Picture in your mind’s eye that as the man approaches, Christ is
casting out the demons, one by one. Where these are to go after being
cast out is the abyss, as we will discover.

· But as some of the demons are cast out, the remaining ones are getting
nervous; they do not want to be cast out so that they will enter into
torment.

· The casting out causes torment in one of two ways.

- It simply causes the spirit to become disembodied, and so it is
complete without sensual perception. The emptiness of a soul without a
body is a terrible emptiness indeed.

- There is also the more tangible torment of residence in the abyss.




Christ’s response to the first entreaty, “And Jesus interrogated him,
saying, ‘What is your name?’ And he says to Him, ‘Legion, because we are
many.’”

Jesus is interrogating the spokesman from all the demons. The direct
object is singular.

The verb is EPEROTAO, which is an intensive form of the verb EROTAO, ‘to
ask.’ To ask intensely is often to interrogate.

The content of the interrogation was brief and to the point: TI ONOMA
SOI. It is quite like the TI EMOI KAI SOI that the demons threw at
Christ just before. This is really quite a clever repartee’ on the part
of Christ.

TI ONOMA SOI is literally, ‘What is a name for you?’

(1) So Christ fixes His clear gaze upon the demon and asks for his name.
The personal pronoun SOI is singular, so that Christ is asking only the
spokesman for his name.

(2) This demands personal responsibility for this rampage, and Christ
consider the spokesman responsible.

(3) And Christ knew already that there were more than one demon in the
man, because He had been casting demons out from him.

Therefore notice the evasive nature of the reply, when the spokesman
says LEGION ONOMA MOI HOTI POLLOI ESMEN - ‘Legion is a name for me,
because we are many.’

(1) The spokesman demon avoids the personal responsibility by stating
that he is Legion…

(2) He does not feel at all compelled to give a straight answer to
Christ’s severe inquiry. On the contrary, he is evasive and even
arrogant with this.

The second entreaty of the demons, “And they were exhorting Him not to
order them to enter into the abyss. And there was on the mountain far
away a herd of many swine, feeding. And the demons exhorted Him, saying,
‘If You cast us out, send us into the herd of swine, so that we might
enter into them.’”

The demons then send forth an exhortation, which is PARAKALEO in the
Greek. Mark puts the verb in the imperfect tense, showing that they kept
on doing this over and over. Many demons may have been using the vocal
cords of the man at this time.

Luke dug up one detail that is missing from the other two synoptic
accounts; that the demons begged Christ not to order them to enter into
the abyss. This is an important detail indeed.

(1) Suddenly the demons realize that what they have done may cause them
to be cast into the jail that is reserved for especially offensive
demonic behavior.

(2) That is the nature of the abyss. It was the place where the angels
from the Nephilim conspiracy of the antediluvian civilization were
incarcerated. In that conspiracy, demons seduced human women and
produced half-angelic offspring, causing much violence and chaos on the
earth. This is recorded in Genesis chapter six.

(3) The angels who are jailed in the abyss reside there in chains of
thick darkness until the tribulation, when they are released. 2 Peter
2:4-5 testifies to this

(4) The only break that these abyss dwellers have had in all that time
was when Christ made His victorious proclamation after His death on the
cross, 1 Peter 3:18-19.

(5) The abyss will again be filled during the millennium, because at the
second advent of Jesus Christ, all of the fallen angels will be cast
there and reside there for the duration. Revelation 20:1-3 makes this
clear.

(6) Being cast into the abyss is a bad thing for a fallen angel. They
are cast there as disembodied spirits, and live without sensory
perception for all that time. There is a mental dimension to this kind
of torment that must be terrible indeed.

So these angels exhort Christ not to order them there.

(1) They realize that He has the authority to do this terrible thing to
them, and they realize that they may have crossed the line with their
activities inside this Decapolite.

(2) There is some guilt that these demons have, where in their souls
they have related their own violent rampage to antediluvian times.

(3) The pre-flood period was a time of domination for the fallen angels
and it was filled with wanton violence. This demon possession really
does have some similarities, and the demons who have perpetrated it are
now worried.

They have an alternate idea; they desire to be sent into the herd of
swine that was feeding a far mountainside.

(1) Apparently, anything is better than the abyss. These demons would
rather be in pigs than there.

(2) So they suggest this in a hopeful manner to Jesus Christ, knowing
that He has the authority by God the Holy Spirit to cast them out, and
to incarcerate them into the abyss with the other violators of the rules
of engagement of the angelic conflict.

(3) Part of God’s guidance of Christ to this spot obviously had to do
with these demons, but they were in violation and were not sent to the
abyss. More, the guidance had to do with evangelism, and using Christ’s
control of these events to further the gospel.

Christ’s granting of the desire, and the result, “And he allowed them
and said to them, ‘Go.’ And after the demons had left the man they
entered into the swine, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the
sea, about two thousand, and they were drowned in the sea.”

Suprisingly, Christ grants the desire. But there is of course a hitch
here.

This happens in three parts, and it happens so fast that you hardly
catch what has occurred.

(1) First, Christ grants the desire, and tells them to go. He uses the
present imperative HUPAGETE, so that this is definitely a command.
Because this verb is plural, it is clear from the original that He said
this to all of them.

(2) Then the demons leave the man and enter the swine;

(3) Then all hell breaks loose, for whatever reason, the swine rush down
a steep bank and into the sea, where they are drowned.

There is a great irony here that has to do with the demons’ demise; they
had begged Christ not to cast them into the abyss, and yet they all end
up in a watery grave.

(1) You see, the abyss was always associated with the deepest part of
the ocean in the Old Testament. Many passages testify to the existence
of a great body of water under the surface of the earth:

(a) Exodus 20:4, “You shall not make for yourself an idol, or any
likeness of what is in heaven above or on the earth beneath or in the
water under the earth (fallen angels incarcerated in the Abyss).”

(b) Psalm 24:1-2, “(1) The earth is the Lord’s, and all it contains, the
world, and those who dwell in it. (2) For He has founded it upon the
seas and established it upon the rivers.”

(c) Psalm 136:6, “To Him who spread out the earth above the waters…”

(2) And right in the middle of the Ten Commandments there is a reference
to the angels who are in the abyss… the watery abyss.

(3) So the prison of the abyss is a watery prison, and that is part of
the unpleasantness there.

(4) So it is more than a little ironic that all these demon-possessed
pigs rush down into the water, where they are drowned.

(5) And this was not the choice of the demons. Was it so horrible for
them that they experienced what it was like to be a pig and chose
immediately to drown themselves, or what there a different power at
work?

(6) It seems unlikely that there was a demon-inspired mass pig suicide
here; the demons wanted so very much to be inside those pigs.

(7) It is rather more likely that God the Holy Spirit had a plan to
teach the demons a lesson…

(a) It is important to note that since the demons were not cast into the
abyss, they did not deserve the abyss.

(b) But what they were doing through this man was questionable indeed,
and pushing the limits on God’s patience with them.

(c) Therefore, God planned to issue a warning to them; He wanted them to
taste what it was like to enter into the abyss, and He used the swine to
achieve this.

(d) With such a graphic lesson, it would be a long time before these
demons would flirt with crossing the line of the rules of engagement
again.

The response of the swineherds, “And the swineherds fled them and
announced everything and especially the things about the demon-possessed
men to the [people of the ] city and to the countryside.”

So here are these swineherds: they are peacefully tending their herd on
the side of a mountain, when…

Far away they see the famous demon-possessed man of the region accosting
the leader of a small group of men. And they think to themselves: ‘Here
we go again…’

But instead of the expected violent outcome, the leader of the group of
men speaks and gestures and before you know, their swine go crazy, and
plunge down into the sea.

It is obvious that the demons have been cast out, causing the insane
behavior of the swine.

So the swineherds flee; they have seen enough and off they go into the
city; likely Gergesa or Hippo on the eastern shore of Galilee.

They go into the city and the countryside, and announce what happened.

The verb is APAGGELO. This verb denotes the function of a messenger or
even of a town crier.

They have the great scoop about the end of the reign of terror, and so
they go and announce it to the city, and to the people in the region
that was dominated by this demon-possessed man.




Their announcement especially concentrates on the demon-possessed man.
In reality, they have missed the significance of this.

Remember that this is a Gentile region. Indeed the presence of
swineherds betrays this in a rather spectacular fashion. There was never
a need for swine in Israel with their strict dietary laws, because the
swine was an unclean animal.

So these Gentiles do not know of the Messiah of the Jews, or if they
have heard of Him, they do not associate this incident with Him.

Since God the Holy Spirit has the authority with regard to these
demon-exorcisms, we can consider His timing significant. It is His
intention to expand Christ’s ministry to include the Gentiles.

Christ is the King of kings and Lord of lords. He is authorized by the
two crowns of His bloodline to rule over Jew and Gentile alike.

There is a great symbolism in this demon exorcism. Christ has set the
region free from the domination of demons; He will also set them free
from the domination of sin. Now in this part of His ministry, Christ
makes the bold proclamation that He is for all the peoples of the world.

But of course the local peoples miss these distinctions. The focus of
the swineherds is on the demon-possessed man; he has been rendered
powerless. And the peoples’ interpretation of this pronouncement is
going to be interesting indeed.

The reaction of the city folk, “And the people of the city came out to
see what was happening, and they came to Jesus and found the man from
whom the legion of demons had been cast out sitting down at the feet of
Jesus, clothed and mentally well, and they were afraid.”

So the city folk hear from the swineherds what had happened. They want
to go directly to the scene of the event, and so there they go out to
see what was happening.

Notice that they really didn’t go out to see Jesus; they didn’t go with
the intent of thanking Him for restoring peace and prosperity to their
city.

Because the demon-possessed man had shut down the road to their city,
commerce had been restricted, and the city was more or less held hostage
to this rampage. There would have been a fair amount of people just
sitting around inside the safe confines of the city gates.

They behold a significant sight; the verb THEOREO always denotes the
witnessing of a sight of importance, of something that will not be
forgotten. This is significant to them.

And here is what they see. The demon-possessed man is sitting at the
feet of Jesus, clothed and mentally well.

SOPHRONOUNTA describes the man’s mental state. This is a sound and
well-functioning mind. It is someone who is able to exercise wisdom.

And lo and behold, the man has clothes on. The rampage of the first
streaker in history has come to an end.

And they were afraid.

But why? Shouldn’t they be overjoyed that the rampage has come to a
peaceful end, and they can now go about their everyday lives in peace?

They think irrationally here, but this is what they think: that the man
who had the power to bring this about is a more powerful man than the
last. That much is a good conclusion.

But they also conclude that they have something to fear from this
powerful man. They are afraid because they see the corruptive potential
of all power.

This is not at all like the Jew’s reason for the rejection of Jesus
Christ.

(1) We might observe that the Pharisees rejected Christ because they
feared being supplanted by Him - they feared the loss of power.

(2) And the people of Israel rejected Christ because they did not see
Him as the means to get what they wanted, which was political autonomy
from Rome.

(3) When Christ told those people that the change had to come
spiritually before it ever would politically, they closed their ears and
their eyes to His plan.

(4) Now these people have their reason for rejecting Christ too, it is
just not the same reason.

(5) These Gentiles are afraid because they mistakenly categorize Him as
sharing the same nature as the demon-possessed man.

The report of the eyewitnesses to the city folk, “And the ones who saw
[it happen] reported to them how the demon-possessed man was saved, and
about the swine.”

As the city folk arrive at the scene, they are greeted by the
eyewitnesses to the event. These people report to the city folk how the
demon-possessed man was saved, and the nature of the event with the
swine.

And now they have all the facts at hand. They can be forgiven; they
received the initial report from the hysterical and panicked swineherds,
but now comes a more calm and objective treatment of the subject. Surely
now they will respond in a proper manner. But they do not.

The judgment of the people, “And all the people of the surrounding
countryside of the Gerasenes asked Him to leave from their mountain,
because they were seized with great fear; and after embarking into the
boat He returned.”

We now the situation gets even worse with the information. The
information only confirms their fears, and they are seized with a great
fear.

They ask Him to leave from their mountain, and of course the boat is
still there at hand.

For all appearances it seems as though the expedition to the Gentile
region of Decapolis is finished and a failure. But it is not.

The entreaty of the formerly possessed man, “And while He embarked into
the boat the man who had been demon-possessed exhorted Him so that He
might be with him.”

Just as Jesus is getting into the boat, the formerly demon-possessed man
exhorts Jesus to come along.

Here is a second exhortation from the same man; the first, as you
recall, came from the demon possessing him. And now the exhortation is
to follow Christ.

Perhaps he is fearful lest more demons come his way; perhaps he is
grateful and he wants to learn more about the plan of God. But no. There
is a plan.

Christ’s reply, “And He did not allow him, but He said to him, ‘Go into
your house with your own [family] and announce to them what sort of
things the Lord has done for you and what sort of mercy He has done for
you.’

Well now, Christ commanded His disciples to follow Him; why not this
man? Didn’t Christ trust him?

Actually this man is going to be the very first missionary. Christ
recognizes that the man is going to be a powerful witness on His behalf
among his own people.

Christ realizes something in a humble way: that what He could not do
personally, this man could do to great effect.

Christ, even Christ with His great wisdom and vast storehouse of Old
Testament doctrine is not going to have an effect here.

The people of the region have asked our Lord to leave; He wanted to
stay, but He will not go against their wishes.

And this man, with no formal training, is going to go out and change his
world; in the not-too-distant future, Christ is going to return to the
Decapolis in Mark 7:37-8:9. The only reason that He will have a new
opportunity there is because of what this man is doing while He is
absent.

Christ informs the man to go back to his own family, and tell his family
what has occurred.

There is more here than meets the eye; in order to reach the point where
the man would so easily allow about 2,000 demons to enter in to himself,
this man must have been a terrible degenerate.

So when he goes back to his own house and his own family, there is more
than just a gladness about the removal of the demons; there is a
gladness about the recovery from degeneracy as well. This is double
measure of God’s grace.

The man’s obedience, “And he went away preaching in each city of the
Decapolis what sort of things Jesus did for him, and everyone marveled.”

Now the formerly demon-possessed man goes forth and preaches in each
city of the Decapolis about Jesus Christ.

The man really was preaching, and telling everyone of the quality of
spiritual care that he received from the Messiah of the Jews.

And everyone in all of those ten cities marveled. The man was after all
well known - he was quite infamous during his days of rampage.

This was all that Christ needed. His re-entry into the region was much
better received the next time around.

And this says something about the way in which missionary activity is to
take place.

The Healing of Jairus’ Daughter
-------------------------------

Matthew 9:18-26

Mark 5:21-43

Luke 8:40-56

Exposition.

The Setting:

The circumstances. “And after Jesus crossed over in the boat again to
the other side, a great crowd was gathered upon it, and He was by the
sea.”

Now this is a little intriguing: the crowd waited for Him - but how
could they have known? Did He say, ‘I’ll be back’? We have no record of
such a promise…

Remember, they stayed a day on the shore, while Jesus preached the
parables. That night they crossed the Sea of Galilee, where the event
with the demon-possessed man played out in a very short time.

Now they cross right back over. The Sea itself is only about six or
seven miles across at its widest. The masts and sails of a small vessel
would be easily visible on a clear day.

So they spotted the vessel which carried Christ coming back that very
morning - and in a little while it came closer and arrived.

The crowd had simply spent the night on the beach, and as they wakened
they saw the same boat coming from the direction which it left. They had
really had no time at all to disperse.

There are a number of cities nearby which this may take place: Tiberias
to the southwest; Magadan to the west; Capernaum and Bethsaida to the
northwest; or perhaps Bethsaida Julias to the northeast. But even by
land reckoning, these cities are separated by not more than a hard day’s
journey. Wherever this spot was on the seashore it would have been
accessible by all of these towns.

The attitude of the crowd. “And the crowd welcomed Him for all were
waiting eagerly for Him.”

Since the boat was returning the crowd began to anticipate His return.
They had spent the night thinking about His parables, and perhaps
wondering if He would do another miracle or healing.

Luke 8:40 describes the eagerness of the crowd with PROSDOKEO, to ‘think
toward’ something. This was the Greek equivalent of ‘looking forward’ to
something, like we say in the English.

Whatever the motive, they were still there, and anxious to see and hear
Him.

The Plight of Jairus.

The arrival of Jairus. “And one of the rulers of the synagogue came,
named Jairus, who was always at the disposal of the [other] rulers of
the synagogue.”

They have returned to the Galilean side of the sea, and so one of the
towns near the sea shore has a synagogue. It doesn’t really matter which
town, but there is an important side note to make here. Christ has a
history with this region - and that history translates into fame. Think
about it:

(1) Christ healed the child of the royal official from Capernaum. That
time it was a male child who was at the point of death, and the child
never did die. John 4:46-54.

(2) Peter’s mother in law was healed at Capernaum. Mark 1:29-34.

(3) Somewhere in Galilee Christ cleansed the leper, which caused much
publicity, Mark 1:40-45.

(4) At Capernaum again, Christ forgave and healed a paralytic, Mark
2:1-12. The scribes took great offense, because they said that only God
can forgive sins.

(5) Christ went to Jerusalem where the Pharisees tried to kill Him for
alleged blasphemy, John 5.

(6) Christ had to flee back to Galilee, where immediately there was a
controversy because His disciples picked grain on the Sabbath, Mark
2:23-28.

(7) Later, He healed a man’s withered hand in a synagogue in Galilee,
Mark 3:1-6. This is particularly pertinent, because even if it wasn’t
Jairus’s synagogue, he would have learned of this healing from the
synagogue rulers in the other towns. There is still a reasonable chance
that this happened right before Jairus’ eyes.

(8) In Mark 3:7-12, great multitudes from Galilee were following Him.

(9) The Sermon on the Mount occurred on a mountain somewhere near the
Sea of Galilee.

(10) Christ healed the centurion’s servant in Luke 7:1-10. This took
place in Capernaum.

(11) At Nain, just a few miles from Galilee, Christ raised the widow’s
son, Luke 7:11-17.

(12) Chorazin and Bethsaida failed to repent in Matthew 11:20-30. This
after He had done most of His miracles there.

(13) Somewhere in Galilee, Christ met with the Pharisees, where the
formerly sinful woman anointed and kissed His feet, Luke 7:36-50. These
Pharisees would have been acquainted with the synagogue rulers of the
region, and some may have been present at this table as guests of honor.
Jairus would have heard about this.

(14) Christ had an itinerant ministry in Galilee, and the women’s
auxiliary was formed, Luke 8:1-3. Christ’s respectful treatment of women
was by this time quite well known, and Jairus would have been aware of
this with respect to his own daughter.

(15) Then there was the controversy over the exorcism in which the
Pharisees claimed that Christ was casting out by the authority of the
prince of demons, Mark 3:20-30. This like everything else added to
Christ’s fame.

(16) All of this adds up to one thought about Jairus: he knew beyond a
shadow of a doubt that Christ could help his daughter, regardless of her
state.

There is a twofold description of Jairus:

(1) Matthew says, ‘one of the rulers.’

(2) Mark says, ‘one of the rulers of the synagogue.’

(3) Luke says something a little different: ‘He was always at the
disposal of the synagogue-rulers.’ This description puts him not quite
as one of the rulers, but as a kind of under-officer of the rulers.

(4) Either way, his life is filled with religious matters. From the
ISBE, volume four:

(a) A rabbi could come from any segment of the community. Leadership
rotated among influential and educated members in each community rather
than being imposed by some overarching institution or system. The rabbi
was the spiritual and practical head of the community.

(b) There were three categories of rulers in every synagogue:

· The head of the synagogue, who supervised services, maintained order,
and was only a short step below the Scribes of Jerusalem.

· The minister, who was in charge of the structure and contents of the
synagogue. He also signaled the beginning and end of services, and ran
the services.

· The elders, who were the mainstays, the wise old men of the synagogue.
It was from these that the synagogue minister and ruler were chosen. It
is most likely that Jairus was one of the lesser elders of the local
synagogue, at the disposal of the men with great authority and
experience.

(c) Worship in the ancient Jewish synagogue consisted of prayer and
teaching.

· The leaders of worship would read prayers from the Psalms and any
Scripture that suited the current theme.

· But there was also a sermon employed to educate the people regarding
religious matters.

· The sermon could be given by anyone in the synagogue, but only by one
who had already devoted some study and thought to the text or through a
rabbi. There was no ordination requirement.

· The passage would be interpreted verse by verse in the language of the
people.

The plea of Jairus. “And seeing Him, he fell at His feet and exhorted
Him to come into his house with strong words, ‘My daughter has come to
the last, I came in order that after coming You might lay hands upon her
that she might be saved and might live.’”

So this man Jairus falls at the feet of Jesus. This represented a more
than significant sacrifice of pride on his part.

The party of the Pharisees were diametrically opposed to Christ; the
Scribes and Pharisees had even wanted Jesus dead for quite some time.

But this man does not fool around; he does not go to begging Christ only
after all other kinds of pleas have failed. He goes straight to it.

Make no mistake that this is more than a sacrifice of pride - this act
of humility represent a clean break from his old life, for he will be
ostracized for going to Jesus.

If the Pharisees would be evil enough to plot against Christ’s life,
then it would be nothing for them to censure a man who was associated in
a small way with Him. Jairus knows full well what the consequences of
this action will be.

Jairus exhorts Christ with strong words - PARAKALEI POLLA.

(1) The verb means to call alongside an expert in your realm of need.
Usually this has to do with legal help, but here it is another category
- spiritual medical help.

(2) The adverb POLLA describes how the exhortation was accomplished:
‘greatly,’ or ‘with much force.’ When you combine this with the man’s
body language, you can see how he was in that begging tone of voice.

Jairus says, “My daughter has come to the last.”

(1) Matthew indicates that Jairus told the Jesus that she was dead. Mark
has him saying that she was at the very brink of death. Matthew
communicates the man’s feelings while Mark his actual expression.

(2) You can say that your daughter is about to die with a fallen tone of
voice, and your listeners will understand that the situation is
hopeless. That is what Matthew understood, and he converted that into
his text.

And then he wants Jesus to lay hands on her, so that she might be saved
and live.

(1) It is not necessary at all for Jesus to touch the girl; He has
healed more often than not by word. A quick random sampling will reveal
this:

(a) The royal official’s son at Capernaum was healed from miles away;

(b) Peter’s mother-in-law by touch;

(c) The man with the withered hand simply by obeying in stretching out
his hand;

(d) The widow’s son was raised by a word.

(2) So does Jairus have a misconception about this? Perhaps not, because
the laying on of hands is also an idiom for ‘doing’ something.

(a) Indeed the doctrine of laying on of hands with regard to deacons in
the church is about giving them guidance and leadership early in their
service.

(b) But the power is not necessarily in touch, so much as it is in the
sovereignty of God the Holy Spirit. And in any assumption on how the
healing is to be done there is a misconception.

(c) But this does not necessarily interfere with the faith of the man;
and that is what our Lord chooses to emphasize.

The plight of Jairus. “Because the only born daughter to him, about
twelve years old, indeed she was dying.”

Luke is the one who explains that Jairus daughter is an only-born
daughter. This is kind of a twist that comes from this Greek word
MONOGENES.

If you recall, the widow’s son at Nain was an only-born son to her, and
Jesus had compassion because He recognized His own mother in that
situation.

There is significance and symbolism here in this only-born daughter.

(1) Significance because she is a she. This becomes a bold statement
that gender does not at all matter with regard to the plan of God.

(2) Symbolism because the only-born daughter of Jairus is analogous to
Christ as the only-born Son of God.

But there is even more symbolism in the age of the girl - she is twelve
years old.

(1) Because Luke mentions her age, he thinks it is important. The number
twelve is significant to the Jews, because of the twelve tribes of
Israel, but Luke is not writing to Jews.

(2) Mark mentions the girl’s age in relation to her ability to walk
around, but there is no other relevance to the girl’s age indicated by
him.

(3) But Luke does, and there are two possible points of relevance.

(a) First, it was at the age of twelve that Christ first went to
Jerusalem; it was His coming of age year. There may be something to
this, because Luke’s gospel is the only one that records the incident at
the temple - Luke 2:41-51.

(b) Second, it related to the length of time that the woman with the
hemorrhage had suffered. This seems even more likely from the content.

(4) But if these two women do relate their age and length of ailment is
this nothing more than a coincidence? Luke is not like that - he doesn’t
record a coincident for its own sake; and remember that God the Holy
Spirit has inspired Luke.

Let’s begin with Hebrews 11:17-19, “(17) By faith Abraham, when he was
tested, offered up Isaac, and he who had received the promises was
offering up his only begotten son; (18) it was he to whom it was said,
‘In Isaac your descendants shall be called.’ (19) He considered that God
is able to raise people even from the dead, from which he also received
him back as a type.”

(1) Jairus’ daughter is a type of Isaac; Isaac is a type of Christ. The
significance of Jairus’ daughter is that she is only born, and about to
die.

(2) Luke is relating her age to the age of Isaac at the time that his
father was about to sacrifice him.

(3) Both Isaac and this girl were only-born; both were twelve; both
about to die.

(4) Under the guidance of the Spirit, Christ wants this to be a symbol
to Israel of his relationship to the sacrifice of Isaac.

(5) Every year the priests of Israel sacrificed hundreds of rams to
commemorate God’s provision of a ram as the substitute for Isaac.

(6) Whereas Abraham did have to give his only-born son, God did. Abraham
learned what a terrible thing it was to have to sacrifice what is most
precious to him. He had an appreciation for what God had to do in
Christ.

(7) Abraham trusted completely in the promise of God regarding his
only-born son. He knew that God would be faithful.

(8) And Abraham received Isaac back from the dead in a figurative sense
- and so would God in a literal sense.

Jesus’ decision. “And Jesus after rising followed him, and the disciples
likewise.”

Christ had the power in the Spirit to stop the girl from dying as He had
done with the royal official’s daughter earlier.

But he decides to follow Jairus back to his house, and deal with the
situation there. He thought it important to stay within the man’s
perception of what He was and how He healed.

And more than that, Christ was under the guidance of the Spirit to do
this in representation of His own coming ordeal.

The Incident on the Way.

The crowded conditions on the way. “And a great crowd followed and was
pressing in on Him.”

So of course now that everyone knows that Christ is going to do a
healing, and so everyone wants to be in on it.

The entire crowd from the seashore is now moving to the city nearby,
following and pressing in on Jesus. Perhaps they are asking Him
questions, perhaps cheering; they have been a great nuisance to Christ,
and He generally does not like them.

But on this day He is going to have compassion on a man of faith, and at
the same time He is going to make a healing into a nearly unmistakable
symbol of salvation and healing from sin.

The description of the afflicted woman.

Her condition. “And a woman who was continuously with a flow of blood
for twelve years.”

(1) She had a flow of blood, or a hemorrhage; although the accounts do
not specify, it most likely continuous vaginal discharge of blood. This
had been ongoing for twelve years.

(2) Now this flow of blood was not life-threatening. Think about it;
this was ongoing for twelve years, but even after twelve years she is
able to walk and go with the crowd.

(3) The devastating part of this affliction is the impact on the woman’s
life, because of the regulations from the Mosaic Law.

(a) The period of menstruation rendered an Israelite woman ceremonially
unclean for seven days and therefore excluded her from worship in the
sanctuary and from fellowship with other Israelites.

(b) Leviticus 15:19-24, “(19) When a woman has a discharge, if her
discharge in her body is blood, she shall continue in her menstrual
impurity for seven days; and whoever touches her shall be unclean until
evening. (20) Everything also on which she lies during her menstrual
impurity shall be unclean, and everything on which she sits shall be
unclean. (21) Anyone who touches her bed shall wash his clothes and
bathe in water and be unclean until evening. (22) Whoever touches any
thing on which she sits shall wash his clothes and bathe in water and be
unclean until evening. (23) Whether it be on the bed or on the thing on
which she is sitting, when he touches it, he shall be unclean until
evening. (24) If a man actually lies with her so that her menstrual
impurity is on him, he shall be unclean seven days, and every bed on
which he lies shall be unclean.”

(c) The only social intercourse that this woman could legally have was
with other women who were menstruating; she could not legally have
sexual relations with a man; in a society where having children was of
the utmost importance she could have none at all.

(d) This woman is not identified as an old woman. She is a woman of
childbearing age, but she is not allowed to be a woman in any way.

(4) All three accounts protect the woman’s privacy; she may be somebody
whose name we know, and she may not. But there is no connection between
this woman and any other woman of the New Testament.

(5) The woman is connected in an interesting way with Jairus’ daughter -
she has had the flow of blood since the year of the birth of that girl.

Her fruitless quest for relief. “and after suffering much under many
physicians and after spending all of her money and after achieving
nothing but after more coming into the hand,”

(1) She has desperately tried to remedy this situation; her personal
wealth meant nothing, and she spent it all.

(2) There was no little amount of shame associated with these efforts,
and the crude and unusual treatments of the day most likely added a
great deal to her revulsion toward her own body.

(3) She must have been hopeful and hopeless in turns.

(4) And after all the investment the only return that she obtained was
more blood.

Her conclusion about Jesus. “after hearing about Jesus, after coming
with the crowd behind, she touched His garment; for she said, ‘If I
touch even His garments I will be saved.’”

(1) But this woman in her hopelessness finds faith. She does not believe
that she can be helped by the doctors; there is really nowhere left at
all to turn.

(2) And then she knows beyond a shadow of a doubt that Christ is the
answer. She has heard that this man has the power to heal, and look at
the crowd! They know that He can heal Jairus’ daughter, and there is a
corporate momentum.

(3) The faith of the crowd is an interesting phenomenon; they all
believe in Christ’s healing power, but they have the wrong motives
attached to being eyewitnesses. To them it is a circus show. But this
same faith is contagious to this woman, who genuinely needs what power
Christ has through God the Holy Spirit.

(4) Notice that she has a desire to keep this matter private - that she
does not want anyone to know of her affliction, because it is so
private.

(5) Observe this woman’s interpretation of Christ’s power; again she
concentrates on His touch. Even though it is not necessary at all, she
concentrates on touching Christ.

The result of her action. “And immediately the flow of her blood was
stanched and she knew in her body that she was healed from the
affliction.”

(1) Here is something very important that we must interpret. Christ
healed this woman without a conscious decision.

(2) Was there something in Him that would heal anyone who touched Him?
No. But actually this little incident points out something important:
that the sovereignty of God the Holy Spirit was intimately involved in
the healing ministry of Jesus Christ.

(3) And do not forget at all that Christ never employs His power as God
to heal or to do a miracle of any kind. He was given that power in His
humanity thanks to God the Holy Spirit.

Jesus’ response to her action.

His perception of the healing. “And immediately Jesus, after fully
knowing in Himself the power had gone out from Him,”

(1) Now this confirms that this had nothing at all to do with Christ.
God the Holy Spirit made the decision to heal this woman on the basis of
her faith.

(2) The verb EPIGINOSKO describes the full knowledge of Christ - He
realized completely what had happened because He was familiar with the
sensation. There was a definite sensation involved with being a medium
for the Spirit’s healing power.

(3) It certainly was not her power - it was her faith, but not her
power. And it is not right that the healing power was automatic in
Christ according to touch. Christ was in crowds all the time.

(4) So we can describe this by saying that Christ was aware that the
Spirit had healed someone through Him, and that the only way this could
happen is by the avenue of touch.

His statement to the crowd. “after turning on the crowd, He said ‘Who
touched my garments?’”

(1) Christ has even more specific information about the incident. He
knows that the touch was to His garments, and not to His body.

(2) Now again let’s eliminate the silliness here. This was not a magical
robe that caused healing to anyone who touched it.

(3) But the Holy Spirit healed through the robe.

(4) It was not necessary that the woman touch the robe; this is the
false doctrine of healing. But for some (good) reason God the Holy
Spirit honors this woman’s faith and decides to overlook her
misconception about the doctrine.

(5) The motivation of the woman’s action has to do with privacy. God the
Holy Spirit is going to intervene in the woman’s life in a good way, but
not the way that she wanted.

(6) So Christ wants to know who touched His garments. There was a
principle behind the healings of Jesus Christ - they explained something
about His future atonement. It was therefore necessary to make them
public.

(7) Christ is aware that the Spirit has acted, and in humility to the
guidance of the Spirit, He asks the question of the crowd. Christ knows
that if the Spirit has done a healing, then He wants it to be known!

The replies of Peter and the disciples. “And while all were denying it
Peter said, ‘Master, the crowds are crowding You and pressing.’ And His
disciples said to Him, ‘You see the crowd pressing on You and you say,
‘Who touched Me?’”

(1) Everyone around Christ denies that they had touched Him, which is
almost comical, because there must have been many who did. Remember, the
crowd was pressing in on our Lord.

(2) And while all are denying it, Peter pipes in with His statement.

(3) He uses the word EPISTATA, ‘Master,’ to address Christ, which is a
strong term of humility toward authority. At the same time, Peter’s tone
is puzzled.

(4) So Peter gives Christ a gentle reminder that the whole crowd is
pressing in on Him, and that four or five or more were touching Him at
any given time.

(5) The other disciples chime in, and if possible they are stronger in
their questioning of Christ. Their tone reaches into a sinful realm,
because they question Christ in a sarcastic manner. Somehow, they decide
not to trust Him, and it is an unfortunate misunderstanding on their
part.

Jesus’ explanation and continued search. “But Jesus said, ‘Someone
touched Me, for I knew after power had gone out from Me.’ And He was
looking around to see the one who had done this.”

(1) So Jesus has to patiently explain to His disciples that a healing
has occurred, and why He knows that this is so.

(2) He identifies to them what we know from the narrative He had
experienced.

(3) He now begins to look around to see the one who had touched His
garment. He is hoping that there will be some evidence of guilt on a
face in the crowd. Christ is an expert on human behavior, and He knows
He has a shot to identify this person by looking around.

The woman’s self-disclosure.

Her realization of being caught. “And the woman after she saw that she
was not hidden,”

(1) The woman realizes that she was not hidden. You can see Christ gaze
into the crowd, and stop when His gaze reaches her. She had done this
thing, and there was no hiding it.

(2) From her perspective - why did she stay? This is a woman with a
conscience, and a woman of great faith. She easily could have filtered
through the crowd and remained completely hidden, but she remained.

Her fear and knowledge the healing. “after fearing and trembling, after
knowing what had happened to her,”

(1) In Mark 5:33 we have this description - she is at first filled with
fear and trembling. She is so afraid that she has done something wrong.

(2) She came to the conclusion that her healing would come with a touch
by her own initiative, but this was not necessarily true because Jesus
could heal by the word of His mouth.

(3) It hardly seemed real that this had actually happened. Just like
that it happened, and then this man is demanding to know who touched
Him, and she feels like she is in trouble. She has no idea why Jesus
would want to know who had touched Him. Is His power to heal in some way
a limited reserve? What will happen?

(4) She is trembling, Mark says, because she knew what had happened to
her. The discharge of power into her, and the immediate knowledge that
she had been healed caused fear.

(5) And this is not a good respect, but a real fear. The woman has faith
but she is by no means mature, because then her perfect love for God
would cast out all her fear. She does not have perfect love; just a
faith that Jesus Christ can heal her. Spiritual maturity was certainly
not the issue for her healing, but it became one almost immediately.

(6) And God the Holy Spirit chose her because He knew that once she
reconciled herself to the publicity and embarrassment she would be a
fantastic witness for Christ.

Her response and declaration of the truth to Christ and to all. “went
and fell down before Him, and said to Him the whole truth, and declared
before all the people the reason she touched Him and that she had been
immediately healed.”

(1) So Christ looks at her and she is filled with fear and trembling,
and she decides to come clean completely.

(2) She goes through the crowd to Christ, and falls down before Him,
imitating the humility of Jairus.

(3) And it is worth mentioning that she does imitate Jairus; only
minutes before, that man had fallen before Jesus Christ, making his
humility public even at the hazard of the loss of esteem and even more
so his position in the local synagogue.

(4) Now she sacrifices another kind of pride, because she described a
problem with her reproductive health. And this was in a time when that
was considered very, very private.

(5) And there is more - when she touched Christ, she had the potential
to make Him ceremonially unclean - this may have been the reason that
she was so scared - the potential to make the Messiah unclean. Perhaps
that is the reason she understood Him to be asking - because she
mistakenly identified that He knew within Himself to be unclean.

(6) So she tells the whole truth - she confesses her perpetually unclean
condition, and what she had done in her desperation.

(7) She must have had a courage born of desperation, because she had
made many people unclean by her presence in that crowd, and she had
therefore risked their ire. Furthermore, she had risked the ire of the
Messiah Himself!

(8) But she knows that there is one fact on her side, and one reason
that she can come forward with the whole truth: she had been healed. She
knew within herself that the flow of blood had stopped.

(9) She would have seen revulsion on the faces of many in the crowd, had
she dared to look. But she did not see anything like that on the face of
the Messiah. She saw approval and appreciation for that courage.

(10) And the approval of the Messiah trumps the disapproval of
thousands. This is certainly true as a general principle.

(11) Spiritual self-esteem is confidence in your own spiritual standing;
it is looking at yourself through God’s eyes. This is why she must have
been able to overcome the disdain of many. She knew by looking at Christ
that she had done the right thing.

(12) Hebrews 12:1-2, “(1) Therefore, since we have so great a cloud of
witnesses surrounding us, let us also lay aside every encumbrance and
the sin which so easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the
race that is set before us, (2) fixing our eyes on Jesus, the author and
perfecter of faith, who for the joy set before Him endured the cross,
despising the shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of
God.”

(13) It is an objective of your spiritual life to make the opinion of
your savior more important to you than anyone else’s, so that His
opinion has a governing effect on your life.

Christ’s final words to her. “But He said to her, ‘Have courage;
daughter, your faith has saved you; go into peace and be well from your
affliction.’ And the woman was saved from that very hour.”

Matthew’s gospel has the phrase, ‘Have courage, daughter.” The Greek
phrase is THARSEI, THUGATER. THARSEI is a present imperative verb, so it
expresses Christ’s desire for the woman to begin and especially to
continue in courage.

Remember how afraid she was about her affliction, how she trembled with
fear!

But this verb also has the connotation of confidence and self-esteem,
and our Lord here supports her as she talks about her problem.

He knows once He hears of her affliction just what the crowd’s reaction
will be, so He encourages her on the one hand, and keeps the crowd off
her back on the other.

Then Christ lauds her again by telling her that her faith has saved her
and to go into peace. He said this precise phrase to the sinful woman at
the house of the Pharisee.

(1) The woman’s faith is responsible for her saving. Now here there is
more of a physical connotation than with the sinful woman, but remember
physical healing and spiritual healing are closely connected in the
ministry of our Lord.

(a) Isaiah 53:4 was quoted by Matthew when he described Christ’s healing
of Peter’s mother in law: “(4) Surely our griefs He Himself bore, and
our sorrows He carried; yet we ourselves esteemed Him stricken, smitten
of God, and afflicted. (5) But He was pierced through for our
transgressions, He was crushed for our iniquities; the chastening for
our well-being fell upon Him, and by His scourging we are healed. (6)
All of us like sheep have gone astray, each of us has turned to his own
way; but the Lord has caused the iniquity of us all to fall on Him.”
This connects physical healing and healing from total depravity.

(b) This woman placed her total trust in Christ with regard to her
affliction. She knew He had the power to heal her. But Christ indicates
with this phrase that there is more to her faith in Him than just a
desire for physical healing.

(c) Ephesians 2:8-9 puts a proper light on this moment: “(8) For by
grace you have been saved through faith; and that [salvation] not of
yourselves, it is the gift of God; (9) not as a result of works, so that
no one may boast.”

(d) This woman had lived her life in fear and self-disgust and utter
frustration. She had tried every human viewpoint solution that there
was, and none had borne fruit. In this act of trusting God there is a
reconciliation.

(e) She did not make a deal with God; she did not attempt to trade her
fealty for her healing. She simply believed without conditions and this
resulted in her miracle.

(2) The final command is for the woman to go in peace, POREUOU EIS
EIRENEN.

(a) There may be a little adjustment we need to make on this, on account
of the preposition EIS.

(b) This preposition shows more of an entrance into a state than a
status quo.

(c) The verb is a command that shows the earnest desire of Christ - it
is a present imperative.

(d) The present imperative concentrates on a command that is to begin
right away and continue indefinitely.

(e) So this woman is to go and keep on going in peace. Therefore the
command to ‘go’ is closer to ‘live.’

(f) ‘Live always in peace’ would be a fair rendition of this command.

(g) The peace here is most likely a reference to the reconciliation unto
God that this woman has most recently experienced. This would be a
command to perpetuate the reconciliation by staying in fellowship with
God.

(h) This is accomplished naturally through the resistance to temptation,
and the confession of sin when failure is encountered.

(i) This is remarkably similar to Romans 5:1: “Therefore having been
justified from faith, let us have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ…”

(j) There is a pretty good chance that Paul had heard of this woman, and
had this incident in mind when he wrote those important words.

(3) So now two women have received these exact same comments from
Christ. One because she was a sinner, and another because she was ill
and a sinner. And this woman’s faith saved her from that very hour. Both
the physical and the spiritual were joined in this woman.

(4) And one more symbol. If Christ can heal this woman who has such a
repulsive ailment, then there is no sin which causes Him to flinch or
shy away.

The Occurrence at Jairus’ House.

The arrival of the messenger, the terrible news, and the conclusion of
the messengers. “While He was still speaking they arrived from the
synagogue-ruler saying ‘Your daughter died; why do you still trouble the
teacher?’”

As Christ is telling this woman to ‘go into peace,’ messengers arrive
from the house of the synagogue-ruler with terrible news.

The daughter who was about to die has just died. But there is more here,
because an attitude is reflected in what else they have to say: ‘Why do
you still trouble the teacher?’

Do these synagogue people really have a concern for Jesus? Because that
is what the words say…

The teacher has too many important things to do; don’t trouble Him.
Don’t distract Him from His important work. Right?

But if these synagogue people had been familiar with Jesus’ ministry,
then surely they would have understood that death was no boundary for
the healing powers of the Messiah. He had raised the son of the widow at
Nain, after all.

But they are not excused because of their ignorance. They call Christ
DIDASKALON, ‘teacher.’ He is not considered by them to be the Messiah,
or even to be a prophet. He is downgraded to simple ‘teacher.’ No better
than any other guy who teaches in the synagogue, and that could be
almost anyone in a synagogue congregation.

Furthermore, if Christ is only a DIDASKALON, then He is a lesser man
than Jairus, because Jairus as a ruler of the synagogue, even as a
simple elder, would have had a higher station than a teacher.

They have no legitimate concern for Christ and His all-important time;
their motivation is to get Jairus away from Him. They perceive Christ as
a danger to their synagogue ruler, and so they make an attempt at
separation here.

This terrible news is good news for Jairus’ people, because it gives
them a chance to redeem their synagogue-ruler!

Jesus’ encouraging reply. “But Jesus, after overhearing the word being
spoken says to the synagogue ruler, ‘Do not fear, only believe, and she
will be saved.’”

Of course, Christ is on to all of their petty machinations, and He knows
exactly what to do. Remember, our Lord is an expert on human nature, and
even on the less savory expressions of it.

The verb PARAKOUO describes Christ’s overhearing. But this also means to
pay no attention to something, and this double meaning is effective
here. Christ overhears what is said, and then ignores it. He overrules
with His own words.

And He does not even reply them; they are not important, but Jairus is.
Christ tells Jairus: “Do not fear, only believe, and she will be saved.’

Once again we have the zone of exclusion between faith and fear. Perfect
faith, perfect love casts out all fear. This was the theme only the
night before this, when the storm occurred at sea.

And you should recall that there has been a very frustrating delay on
the way to help the girl. Christ knows of the urgency of the situation
here, but He sees that He must minister to the woman with the hemorrhage
first, and the God the Holy Spirit has chosen that assignment for Him.

The tumultuous situation at the house. “Now after coming into the house,
He did not allow anyone to follow after Him to enter except Peter and
James and John the brother of James and the father of the child and the
mother. And they came into the house of the synagogue-ruler, and they
beheld a commotion.”

Christ allows only the inner circle of His disciples to follow into the
inner room where the girl lay. These three, Peter, James, and John, were
privileged to see many things that the others did not. Among other
things they alone witnessed the transfiguration and were asked by Christ
to pray with Him in the Garden of Gethsemane.

The mother and the father of the child were also allowed to enter. This
was not to be the business of the crowd after all. They had missed the
healing of the woman on the way, because it was private between her and
the Spirit. And now Christ will not allow this dog and pony show to
enter the house of mourning.

Christ has a sense of dignity and respect and certainly He is thoughtful
of these parents even if He knows there is to be a joyous outcome.

He knows that the child will be raised, but He does not want His noisy
crowd to interfere with the one that He has notice inside the house.

Today’s Handbook of Bible Times and Customs says this about the funeral
bier and procession on pages 245-246: “Funeral processions were common
among the Jews. The body was carried on a wooden bier often consisting
of little more than flat boards… …A bier carried a symbol to indicate
the deceased’s occupation or social status… …A funeral march was hardly
quiet, for the typical Jew believed in venting his emotions by loud
wailing, beating on his chest and even tearing his clothes. Friends,
mourners, and even professional mourners joined in expressing a bitter
farewell. Even the poorest family was expected to hire at least one
mourner. Singer and musical instruments, especially flutes, were also a
part of this procession.”

Christ’s response to the noisy mourners. “And seeing the flute players
and the crying and great wailing, He says to them, ‘Go back out! Why are
you troubled and crying? The child is not dead but is sleeping.’”

Christ now looks inside the house, and sees that the mourners have
already gathered. Apparently the girl’s death was expected, because they
were organized well enough to have the mourning take place in a very
short time after the girl’s death. Perhaps less than an hour has passed
since the girl passed away; perhaps much less than an hour.

Our Lord also understand that this is a false kind of grief.
Professional mourners were a sham and really an insult to death. He
treats them with disdain and tells them to get out. This certainly would
have been a temptation regardless of what Christ knew!

And He does something that is almost comical - He tells professional
mourners who are charlatans at best to stop being troubled and to stop
crying.

But there is another issue: up to this point the narrative has made it
clear that the child has indeed died. Well at least that is the truth
according to the report of those who came from Jairus’ house - the
messengers from the synagogue ruler. And of course all these people here
sincerely believe the child has died. Who is right?

We can depend on this: that Christ has no motive to lie, and even if He
did he would not. The girl is in that nether world just before death;
her soul has not left her body even though her body has ceased virtually
all function. Her heartbeat is indiscernible, as is her breath. She is
pale and completely unresponsive to all attempts at resuscitation.

Now sleep is used to describe the believer in death in anticipation of
resurrection:

(1) 1 Thessalonians 4:1318, “(13) But we do not want you to be
uninformed, brethren, about those who are asleep, so that you will not
grieve as do the rest who have no hope. (14) For if wee believe that
Jesus died and rose again, even so God will bring with Him those who
have fallen asleep in Jesus. (15) For this we say to you by the word of
the Lord, that we who are alive and remain until the coming of the Lord,
will not precede those who have fallen asleep. (16) For the Lord Himself
will descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel
and with the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first.
(17) Then we who are alive and remain will be caught up together with
them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so we shall always
be with the Lord. (18) Therefore comfort one another with these words.”

(2) 1 Corinthians 15:5153, “(51) Behold, I tell you a mystery; we will
not all sleep, but we will all be changed, (52) in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet; for the trumpet will sound,
and the dead will be raised imperishable, and we will be change. (52)
For this perishable must put on the imperishable, and this mortal must
put on immortality.”

(3) However, Christ makes a distinction between death and sleep with His
very words!

But one more insight: Christ was speaking words of comfort here. There
were those who were mourning with legitimacy, and His words are intended
for them. And the comfort comes in the form of the truth, the truth that
the girl has not yet died.

The mourners’ ridicule of Christ and their removal from the scene. “And
laughing at Him knowing that she died - but casting them all out,”

The mourners ridicule Jesus Christ, even though they are wrong. Their
mourning was inappropriate because it was false and the girl was not
dead after all.

There are participles here which describe the ongoing laughter - present
participles in the nominative case which form the subject of the
sentence. This all depicts something that starts and then continues.

The laughter starts - ridicule of Christ’s conclusion - after all, this
guy just walks in and says something that is so obviously untrue. This
is mean laughter.

And then the sentence stops. Modern conventions of punctuation have
tried to fix this problem, but the intent in both Mark and Luke is to
interrupt one sentence with another so that we know Christ has
interrupted the laughter. The sentence describing their laughter stops
to grammatically portray the cessation of laughter and more.

The new sentence says - ‘but casting them all out, He took alongside the
father of the child and the mother and those with Him and entered where
the child was.”

(1) Christ cast out all those who were laughing. They were rude, and
full of disbelief. He casts them out of the house.

(2) This same verb, EKBALLO, is employed time and again with reference
to demon possession. The word picture cannot be missed here that Christ
exorcises these bad and hypocritical people from the house. They are
certainly under demon influence!

(3) PARALAMBANO describes what Christ does with Jairus and his wife. He
‘takes them alongside.’ It does not describe Him as saying anything at
all, but rather acting. By gesture and by eye contact, Christ takes
these people alongside, so that they follow Him into the inner room.

(4) Christ leads; He indicates to them all that there is work to be
done, and so into the girl’s room they go. Those with Him do not need to
be told twice.

The raising of the child. “after seizing the hand of the child He sounds
off to her, ‘Talitha, koum’ which being translated is ‘Little girl, I
say to you, rise!’ And her breath returned and immediately the girl
stood and began walking around; for she was twelve years old. He ordered
her to give to her to eat.”

Christ seizes the hand of the twelve year old. The aorist participle
KRATESAS describes this action. This is an almost violent action. It is
a swift and business-like snatching of the hand.

And not only that, He sounds off to her. EPHONESAN is the verb and it
means to speak very loudly, or even to yell.

These two demonstrative actions are striking. They are so full of energy
and decisiveness. Christ wants them to see His faith in His sweeping
action and to hear His faith in the loud and confident tone of voice.

The actual words from the Aramaic are preserved by Mark: TALITHA KOUM.
They are spoken directly to this girl! They are spoken as though the
girl herself can hear these things with her own ears. She could only do
this if she were alive.

Christ speaks directly to her, and even though she is unconscious and at
the very door of death, He commands her to rise.

Luke adds the detail that at this very moment the breath of the girl
returned. This sounds like the soul of the young woman - and if so, this
comes back to indicates that she has died according to a technical
definition.

(1) But there can be no contradiction whatsoever; either she died or she
did not.

(2) Luke’s gospel has Christ saying that she did not die, but also that
her breath returned. But perhaps the return of her spirit does not mean
that she has actually died.

(3) More likely is this: that PNEUMA means breath here. It is well
within the realm of meaning that this is so. Even though the girl has
stopped breathing, her soul is still present, and she is only
unconscious.

And the moment that her breath returns, she stands and begins walking
around. This is certainly evidence that she is now alive and well! All
the illness and all the weakness are gone in a moment’s time, and she is
restored to full health.

And then Jesus commands that she be given food to eat. She has
apparently been ill for a long time, and there has been a period of time
when she has not been eating. She is completely well at this point so
that she can take and hold solid food.

The response of the parents and Jesus’ final admonition. “And
immediately her parents were astounded with great ecstasy, but He
announced to them to say nothing about the event.”

EXESTESAN EUTHUS EKSTASEI MEGALE forms the response of the parents.
“They were immediately astounded with great ecstasy.”

EXESTESAN and EKSTASEI are related; the former is the verb and the
latter is the noun in the same word group. The verb means to ‘stand
outside oneself.’ And the noun describes that state.

What they saw after they gave up hope was their daughter returned from
certain death, returned after everyone had assumed her dead and begun
even to mourn her.

And now this girl is alive and breathing and walking around; and simply
because Jesus Christ said ‘Talitha Koum.’

But something strange: Christ announced to them to say nothing of the
event, and that no one should about it.

Obviously, this would be difficult since the mourners for the girl were
right outside, and they would either have to bury the child or let her
live out her life. Folks would be able to put two and two together from
the incident, and know that Christ was the only one who could have
accomplished this thing.

But Christ does not want the publicity. After all, it is bad enough with
the crowds as it is. We have already seen what an impediment they are to
His ministry, and they have begun to affect His travel plans.

It does not help at all that the crowd is motivated to follow Jesus for
the wrong reasons, and that they are not interested in the necessity of
His atonement or any other proper thing like that. To them, Christ is a
circus act; He is entertaining, but not a life changer.

Christ could just stay in one place and have everyone come to Him, but
He has places to go and people to announce the kingdom to, and He does
not want the crowd to be in the way so much.

With Jairus as a synagogue official in this town, there is a greater
danger for the kind of publicity that Christ does not want. Because
Jairus was a celebrity in his own right, there is the potential for an
even greater crowd to follow our Lord. He does not want this.

Healing Incidents
-----------------

Matthew 9:27-34

Exposition.

The Incident of the Blind Men.

Their plea, v.27, “And while passing on from there, two blind men
followed after Jesus, crying out and saying, ‘Have mercy on us, Son of
David!’”

So Christ leaves Jairus’s house and moves on. It does not indicate His
ultimate destination within this passage, but the next part of the
narrative has our Lord in Nazareth - that is where He will eventually
go.

Whether the crowd has dispersed is not evident; it seems like Christ is
alone, or at least only with His disciples. In any event, two blind men
followed after Jesus - but what is wrong with this picture?

How could they follow if they were blind? Apparently unmentioned are
their guides. Family or friends could guide them to Jesus Christ hoping
that He would do something about their condition.

So He goes on His way and these two follow after Him, and they cry out.
The word is KRAZO, and it really does denote desperation here. These men
are desperate for relief from their condition.

Although the substance of their plea is common enough, ‘Have mercy on
us,’ what they call Jesus is interesting indeed - ‘Son of David.’

(1) This way of addressing Jesus Christ was a way of identifying His
lineage and right to the throne of Israel.

(a) John 7:42, “Has not the Scripture said that the Christ comes from
the descendants of David, and from Bethlehem, the village where David
was?”

(b) Romans 1:3, “Concerning His Son, who was born of a descendant of
David according to the flesh.”

(c) 2 Timothy 2:8, “Remember Jesus Christ, risen from the dead,
descendant of David, according to my gospel.”

(2) It is impossible to know for sure the motive that these blind men
have for this mode of address. It is either respect or flattery, and
Christ knows it could go either way. He is going to reserve judgment
until He can inquire further.

Jesus’ testing of their faith, and their reply, v.28, “And after coming
into the house the blind men approached Him, and Jesus says to them, ‘Do
you believe that I am able to do this?’ They said to Him,

So Christ comes into a house, and the blind men approach Him.

And so Jesus tests their faith with the question. By this He will know
for certain whether they are grace oriented.

But when you are blind, grace orientation seems almost an assumption.
Christ does not assume, but asks them whether they trust in His ability
to heal them.

They answer simply and quickly and respectfully, NAI, KURIE.

Jesus’ healing of them, and His admonition, vv.29-30, “ (29) Then He
touched their eyes, saying According to your faith let it happen to
you.’ (30) And their eyes were opened. And Jesus warned them, saying,
‘Let no one know that you see!’”

Again there is touch. He touched their eyes. You can imagine Christ
reaching out with both hands, and their moment of anticipation, because
they do not know what He is going to do. Then they feel His touch, and
instinctively their eyelids close.

And with the touch the words, KATA TEN PISTIN HUMON GENETHETO HUMIN.

(1) The sentence describes a pattern, and the pattern is the faith of
these two men.

(2) Christ communicates not to the men, but to God. This is a prayer.

(3) The imperative of entreaty is the function of the verb GENETHETO.
This is a polite way of issuing a command, and the command is a prayer
command to God.

(4) Christ has supreme confidence in the faith of these men; He places
that confidence in God, knowing that God the Father will be completely
faithful to the faith of these men.

And so these men hear the words as Christ touches their eyes, and then
His touch recedes, and their eyes instinctively open again… and they can
see.

It doesn’t say how long their condition had lasted, but with blindness
it would hardly matter. A lifetime or a matter of weeks would not make a
difference to their desperation, and now to their most definite joy.

And He adds a command to them. Again publicity is a great concern for
Jesus, and He has apparently shucked the crowd for the time being. But
if these men should make public their healing at Christ’s hand, then He
is likely to be mobbed again.

Their disobedience, v.31, “But after they went out [from the house] they
spread it around in that whole area.”

Again we don’t know the motive, we can only observe the disobedience.
They went out from the house and spread it around the whole area. They
did so right away.

DIEPHEMISAN is the verb which means ‘spread around.’ It means literally
to ‘speak throughout.’

So these men leave the house and go on a tour of the whole region, and
speak everywhere they go about how Jesus healed them of their blindness.

It’s not like Christ was using reverse psychology on them, and He wanted
them to spread publicity about Him. They disobeyed, and gave
disrespected to the compassion of Jesus Christ.

The Incident of the Demon-possessed Mute.

His condition, v.32, “And behold! While He was going they brought to Him
a dumb man who was demon-possessed.”

This is really as good a place as any to arrange this little incident.
Since Matthew’s gospel is arranged topically, it is does not follow a
chronology of Christ’s life. Sometimes it is difficult to determine the
chronology of events from Matthew’s gospel alone.

And yet here we have an event that is only in Matthew’s gospel. We will
put it here, but it could be anywhere. To be honest, it feels like this
occurs more toward the beginning of Christ’s ministry, because of the
response of the crowd.

In any event, there is a man who cannot speak, and he has a demon. The
demon is the one who causes this affliction - it is the demon that is
mute, or at least refuses to speak.

Christ had to know that the problem was demonism. Perhaps God the Holy
Spirit gave Him guidance to this end, or perhaps people who knew the man
could tell Him.

The exorcism and its effect on the crowd, v.33, “And after casting out
the demon the dumb man spoke. And the crowd marveled, saying, ‘Nothing
like this was revealed in Israel.’”

It seems so simple a miracle. Christ casts out the demon, and then the
man speaks. It is obvious to all present that the demon caused the
problem in the first place.

The crowd marvels: this comes from the verb ETHAUMASAN. They thought
this was something fantastic, and they say these words: OUDEPOTE EPHANE
HOUTOS EN TO ISRAEL. ‘Nothing like this was revealed in Israel.’

They review the history of their nation, and find nothing like this.
Nothing from Moses until the present time that matches this criteria of
a demon exorcism.

But of course they are wrong on one count, because they have forgotten
their Old Testament.

The exorcisms that Christ performed were for more than compassionate
reasons; they were kingdom signs.

(1) Christ is indeed demonstrating that He is the Son of David. There is
something that I failed to mention when we undertook the Messianic
potential of Christ previously in this passage.

(2) 1 Samuel 16:14-23 is the record of the only exorcism in the Old
Testament: “(14) Now the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an
evil spirit terrorized him. (15) Saul’s servants then said to him,
‘Behold now, and evil spirit from God is terrorizing you. (16) Let our
lord now command your servants who are before you. Let them seek a man
who is a skillful player on the harp; and it shall come about when the
evil spirit from God is on you, that he shall play the harp with his
hand, and you will be well.’ (17) So Saul said to his servants, ‘Provide
for me now a man who can play well and bring him to me.’ (18) The one of
the young men said, ‘Behold, I have seen son of Jesse the Bethlehemite
who is a skillful musician, a mighty man of valor, a warrior, one
prudent in speech, and a handsome man; and the Lord is with him.’ (19)
So Saul sent messengers to Jesse and said, ‘Send me your son David who
is with the flock.’ (20) Jesse took a donkey loaded with bread and a jug
of wine and a young goat, and sent them to Saul by David his son. (21)
Then David came to Saul and attended him; and Saul loved him greatly,
and he became his armor bearer. (22) Saul sent to Jesse, saying, ‘Let
David now stand before me, for he has found favor in my sight.’ (23) So
it came about whenever the evil spirit from God came to Saul, David
would take the harp and play it with his hand; and Saul would be
refreshed and be well, and the evil spirit would depart from him.”

(3) So David is the only Old Testament believer who exorcised demons,
and he did it by means of music and the Spirit of God.

(4) So Christ now reasons that if by the Spirit of God He is casting out
demons, then the kingdom must be upon them, and He Himself must be the
Son of David, the Messiah.

The response of the Pharisees, v.34, “But the Pharisees were saying, ‘By
means of the authority of the demons He casts out the demons.’”

The Pharisees, on the other hand, do not believe them to be kingdom
signs, but rather again claim that Christ is casting out by the
authority of the demons.

This by now is an old accusation, and one that Christ completely refuted
not so long ago in His ministry. Well, here it comes again.

And do you remember how cleverly and accurately Christ refuted those
accusations? This occurred in Mark 3:20-30.

(1) That a house divided against itself cannot stand.

(2) That if someone is casting out demons, then the kingdom of heaven is
at hand.

(3) If you are not a demon, you at least must be stronger than a demon
in order to cast one out.

(4) And if you are not with Christ, then you are His enemy. And if you
are the enemy of Christ, the one who has power over demons, then you
just might be in a heap of trouble!

(5) He finally tells them that He is giving the gospel, and they are
interfering; they are blaspheming against God the Holy Spirit, and
preventing others from being saved. This kind of sin has the gravest of
consequences.

Christ Returns to Nazareth
--------------------------

Matthew 13:54-58

Mark 6:1-6

Exposition.

The transition to Nazareth, and who was with Him, “And He went out from
there and came into His home town, and His disciples followed Him.”

This is all pretty straightforward as far as translation is concerned,
but what seems strange is that Christ is returning to Nazareth at all.
It is strange considering what happened the last time He was there:

Luke 4:16-31a, “And He came to Nazareth, where He had been brought up;
and as was His custom, he entered the synagogue on the Sabbath, and
stood up to read. And the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was handed to
Him. And He opened the book, and found the place where it was
written,”The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because He anointed Me to
preach the gospel to the poor. He has sent Me to proclaim release to the
captives, and recovery of sight to the blind, to set free those who are
downtrodden, to proclaim the favorable year of the Lord.’ And He closed
the book, and gave it back to the attendant, and sat down; and the eyes
of all in the synagogue were fixed upon Him. And He began to say to
them, ‘Today this Scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing.’ But all
were speaking well of him, and wondering at the gracious words which
were falling from His lips; and they were saying, ‘Is this not Joseph’s
son?’ And He said to them, ‘No doubt you will quote this parable to Me,
‘Physician, heal yourself!’ We heard certain things were happening at
Capernaum, do them here in your home town as well.’ And He said, ‘Truly
I say to you, no prophet is welcome in his home town. But I say to you
in truth, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when
the sky was shut up for three years and six months, when a great famine
came over all the land; and yet Elijah was sent to none of them, but
only to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow. And
there were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and
none of them was cleansed, but only Naaman the Syrian. And all in the
synagogue were filled with rage when they heard these things; and they
rose up and cast Him out of the city, and led Him to the brow of the
hill on which their city had been built, in order to throw Him down the
cliff. But passing through their midst, He went His way.”

What a disaster, and He said some very frank things about the people of
His hometown, and they were so angry that they even tried to kill Him.

A year or more has passed, and time enough for passions to settle down
somewhat. In the interim, Christ’s fame and popularity have grown. He
has spent months and months in the region of Galilee, healing and
teaching.

It was His former custom to teach in the synagogue. As a young man, He
was often allowed to give dissertation there on various Old Testament
passages and subjects. But on that previous occasion, He finally
identified Himself as the Messiah, and the people were not interested.

Because they were so interested in miracles, they were distracted from
His Bible teaching, and as a result He told them that He would not do
any miracles at all.

They were outraged at this prohibition, and tried to kill Him, but He
slipped away before anything could happen.

So the conclusion is that it took courage to go back there.

On observation: on the previous occasion, He had no disciples with Him.
It was just after He escaped from Nazareth that Christ first called the
four, Simon Peter, Andrew, James, and John. Although Christ was no
coward, and He had no compulsion to go alone, there were twelve entering
Nazareth this time, that that would likely deter any attempts on His
life.

His teaching in the synagogue and the response of the crowd, “And after
the Sabbath came, He began to teach in the synagogue, and many while
hearing Him were ‘knocked out,’”

He taught once again on the Sabbath, which was His old custom back home.
As a young man, it was very common for Him to teach in the synagogue and
now He has returned to do the same thing.

The people of Nazareth had no idea as to what they had. This young man
who was so very knowledgeable of the Old Testament taught often, but
they were pointedly uninterested in His ideas.

Yet the sermons of the young man Jesus had to be dynamic so as to change
lives. How sad that so few benefited from what was the greatest pulpit
ministry in history. Perhaps only His mother and one or two more really
understood what He was saying.

While they heard Christ, they were ‘knocked out.’ The verb is
EXEPLESSONTO. The uncompounded form of this verb simply means to ‘strike
someone with force.’ That is, it portrays the violent act of hitting
someone. EKPLESSOMAI meant to hit them and knock them out.

But of course this could be good or bad. They could be struck violently
in taking offense, or they could be struck violently and knocked out in
amazement.

Well, this passage goes on to say that they are having a negative
reaction to His teaching.

We can assume that Christ taught a solid and appropriate message here.
We can assume that there was plenty of spiritual growth available in
this message. But these people of Christ’s hometown hate it with a
violence.

This message has caused them rage and vitriol that left them knocked out
- beside themselves.

And this gives us insight on the town where Christ grew and developed
into a young man. To say that it was spiritually arid would be an
understatement.

But how He developed character by preaching all those great sermons to
people who were flatly uninterested!

And yet in this most arid of spiritual climates, Luke 2:51-52 has this
to say about our Lord: “(51) And he went down with them, and came to
Nazareth; and he continued in subjection to them; and His mother
treasured all these things in her heart. (52) And Jesus kept increasing
in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and men.”

He grew in favor with god and men. He had a good reputation among the
men of Nazareth. But couldn’t this have to do with the establishment and
business side of Christ’s life?

Another possibility is that they only developed this negative attitude
after Christ became famous. They could handle His sermons, and they were
supportive of Him, but when He became famous, they became petty and
judgmental. But this seems less likely than the other possibility.

Regardless, they did not like what He had to say, and for the most petty
of reasons.

“saying, ‘From where did these things come to Him and what is the wisdom
given to Him and the miracles such as what happens through His hands?
Isn’t He the carpenter, and the son of the carpenter and Mary, and the
brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon? And aren’t His sisters
with us? Therefore when did all these things come to Him?’ And they took
offense at Him.”

The crowd stated their reasons, and they are plain for us to see and
analyze. They say, “Where did these things come from?” The demonstrative
pronoun TAUTA points to the object most immediately at hand, and they go
on to define it as the wisdom given to Him and the miracles such as what
happens through His hands. We will look at each in turn.

First is the wisdom given to Him.

So if you think about it, the crowd knows that this is wisdom and
insight that comes from the mouth of their hometown boy.

And even though they know that it is wisdom, they cannot stand the fact
that it comes from Him.

And they deny Him as having much to do with that wisdom. Their denial
goes beyond the point of grace orientation.

They employ this phrase (recorded in Mark 6:2) TIS HE SOPHIA HE DOTHEISA
TOUTO. “What is the wisdom given to Him?”

(1) The passive voice of the articular participle DOTHEISA indicates
that they did not believe Christ to be the source of this SOPHIA,
wisdom.

(2) And this is where they are incorrect. Wisdom is applied truth. Look
at this:

(a) You make four decisions with regard to the truth:

· To Hear it;

· To Believe it;

· To Inculcate it;

· And to Use it.

(b) God the Holy Spirit does two things.

· He processes it after you believe in it;

· He recalls it when you need it, before you use it.

(c) God the Father does four things with regard to the truth.

· He is the source of the all truth;

· He caused it at various times to enter human history;

· He sustains it in human history.

· He brings us to it through guidance and discipline.

(3) Now you can summarize this by saying:

(a) That God is the source of truth, and the ultimate source of all
wisdom.

(b) That God enables us so that we are brought to the truth, and can
process it, and apply it.

(c) That we are responsible through our free will for taking what is
provided, for believing and inculcating, and for using it.

(4) It is fair to say that without God, there would be no truth, and
without His grace we could have no wisdom whatsoever.

(5) But it is also fair to say that we obtain wisdom by means of good
free will decisions, and that we possess wisdom.

Because of the negative tenor of these comments, we can assume that they
think the wisdom could not possibly have come from Christ. What follows
is their analysis of Christ’s roots.

They identify that He was a carpenter, and His father was the carpenter.

So this is menial and humble labor. His father was a carpenter, and He
had followed in His Father’s business.

Now when we think of carpentry, we think of building houses and decks
and even more ambitious projects.

But this was not the case, since most homes in Israel were not made of
wood, so much as of stone and brick. There was, after, a shortage of
trees that could be made into beams.

The noun TEKTON encompasses a wide variety of skills, including crafts
and artifice. Wood-carving, weaving, and perfume-making are just a few
of the things possible.

What is difficult is that Christ does not allude to His former
profession in His discourses and conversation. There is no solid clue as
to what this was.

This comment from the people of Nazareth is meant to be demeaning. They
are identifying this as a common profession; even an inferior one. It is
a background from which you would not expect greatness.

Their implication is that this is not fair. These people apparently have
an elitist view of the Messiah. He is, after all, supposed to be the
king of the people of Israel. And He is, after supposed to be a
descendant of King David.

How could this lowly man, a man of such a low profession, be the
Messiah? How could He be wise, and have such miraculous powers? You can
almost feel their bitterness.

It would be like a janitor, or the guy who does your lawn, or a
construction worker ended up being the Messiah. You just don’t expect
that guy to be the Messiah.

They also go through a checklist of names in Jesus’ family.

Mother, sons, and daughters are all mentioned. But of course this is
part of discourse that registers incredulity at Christ the wise man, and
Christ the miracle worker.

They look at His family, and their conclusion is that this is just not
right. They cannot believe that the Messiah came from this family.

How they turn up their noses at this notion. Once again there is a
general attitude of elitism about Christ. It couldn’t be, and it is
wrong!

This does not mean that Christ came from a bad family; it does indicate
that His was a family of generally low estate. There may have been
plenty of virtue, and I am sure that if Mary was involved, there must
have been a good upbringing.

Can you imagine, however, being a brother or sister to Jesus Christ?
Wow. How truly challenging to be imperfect, and to have a sin nature,
and to live in the same house with the boy Messiah! Only Christ’s
guardian angel had it harder… James is the only one we know for sure
came out right. He wrote the first epistle of the New Testament.

One note: two different names are employed by Matthew and Mark for one
of Christ’s brothers. Matthew says Joseph while Mark says Joses. The
latter was probably a nickname.

So they have maligned Christ, His family, and His profession. How could
they do this? Christ was after all a good man.

And then it says that they took offense at Him. The verb is SKANDALIZO,
which means to stumble, or take offense. This of course sounds familiar.
Where was this quoted?

Jesus Christ is one of two stones in everyone’s life: The cornerstone or
the stumbling stone.

As the cornerstone, He is the foundation for thought, motive, decision,
and action.

As the stumbling stone, He is the object of bitterness and motivation
for cosmic involvement.

1 Peter 2:6-8 identifies this syndrome: “(6) Therefore it is contained
[somewhere] in Scripture, ‘Behold I place a stone in Zion, a choice
precious cornerstone, and the one who believes in Him will certainly not
be ashamed.’ (7) Therefore, the honor is for you who believe, but for
those who disbelieve, ‘The stone which the builders rejected, this
became the chief corner,’ (8) and, ‘The stone of bruises and rock of
stumbling;’ they stumble against the word, disobeying into what also
they were appointed.”

Principle: Christ causes people to stumble because His life is
confrontational. His life confronts us with eternal choices, and causes
us to surrender our pride, totally surrender.

Taking offense means putting up a defense.

(1) This is the nature of the cosmic system; to lie about Christ’s true
nature, and about His work. Especially though His work.

(2) And with every lie comes a supermarket, a megamall of substitutes.
There are substitute of every shape and color imaginable. Ways to
attempt to replace what Christ has done.

(3) And with the replacements there must be a denigration of Christ’s
character and His work; even of His reality as a person.

(4) This is the rational nature of a human being. You have to do
something with Christ, because He is there, and He does not go away.

Now Christ analyzes their words: “But Jesus said to them, ‘A prophet is
not dishonored except in His home town and among His own relatives and
in His own house.’”

Wow. This is pretty extensive. Our Lord expands this criticism to
include His hometown, His relatives, and His immediate family.

Even His immediately family. This puts more of a face on the people who
are surprised at His success.

Some were maligning His family, but Christ certainly here includes His
own immediately family among those who were not welcoming Him.

There were some brothers and sisters who were maligning Christ with the
others; questioning His Messiahship.

Christ had a heart for these people. After His last disastrous visit, He
had no extraneous motivation to return. He came back because they were
His people, and He wanted them to join His kingdom.

And there is risk involved here, especially considering the serious
threat to His life which occurred last time He came to visit.

So He comes with the purest of motives, and a willingness to risk for
these people. These are the ones He knows best. After all, He spent 27
years with them, and He has spent only a year or two with His disciples.

There was a certain amount of nostalgia here. Christ was experiencing
old memories, fond and not so fond. But He comes back to Nazareth, and
they reject him again.

This had to be one of the more difficult disappointments of His life up
to this point. And yet He took it with grace.

The limited healing ministry in Nazareth, and the reason for the limit,
“And He was not able to do any miracles there because of their unbelief
(Except after laying hands on a few sick people He healed them.) And he
marveled because of their unbelief.”

Here is a reminder that no healing was done apart from the belief of the
one with the ailment.

The reason is simple: Christ’s healing ministry represents the healing
atonement of the cross. The cross does not automatically save everyone,
just as Christ did not automatically heal everyone. Both require belief.

This makes Christ’s miracles and healing ministry a very potent vehicle
for the gospel, and at the same time incriminates the people of Nazareth
all the more.

This is reminiscent of the time that Christ pronounced woes upon
Chorazin and Bethsaida, because there were many great miracles done
there, and yet they did not repent.

And yet a distinction must be made. At least in those towns there was
enough faith so that great miracles could be done. This could barely be
said of Christ’s home town. Therefore they were even worse off than the
two accursed towns of Northern Galilee.

And those towns were truly accursed, and pronounced as more cursed than
Tyre and Sidon for the day of judgment.

Christ marveled because of their unbelief. This is the statement of Mark
6:6a, and the Greek word is the aorist indicative ETHAUMAZEN.

This means to perceive something as completely extraordinary, and even
to have the inward emotional reaction on account of the perception.

If it is a good thing to marvel at, then there is joy; if bad, then
revulsion. Christ here experienced a negative emotional reaction to what
His senses perceived concerning His hometown people.

Now consider: Christ had seen all kinds of negative response to His
ministry, and the Pharisees were even trying to kill Him. He had
pronounced woes upon three cities in Northern Galilee because they were
so stubborn regarding the object of His ministry.

And yet this unbelief is considered by Christ to be completely
extraordinary. These were bad people indeed!

And yet certain principles must always apply:

They cannot be the object of blanket judgment.

If possible, the gospel must be given opportunity with them again and
again.

The Final Galilean Ministry
---------------------------

Matthew 9:35-38

Mark 6:6b

Exposition.

“And Jesus was going around all the cities and villages in a circle,
teaching in their synagogues and preaching the gospel of the kingdom and
healing every disease and every sickness.”

This was a circular ministry. Mark brings out this detail with the word
KUKLO. You are familiar with this word because you know ‘Cyclops,’ which
means ‘round-eye,’ and of course anything in the ‘cycle’ word group.

So Christ went around the villages in a circle; He had a set path
according to certain villages and cities that He would visit. These
formed a rough circle. It is not clear which cities and villages these
are, but they are certainly in Galilee.

It is now winter coming into the spring of AD 29. Christ has been active
in His ministry for almost two years.

It was His strategy to go into the synagogues and teach, and to preach
His gospel of the kingdom, which He had introduced late in the previous
autumn. He has been preaching the gospel of the kingdom for about four
months.

There is a semantic difference between teaching and preaching.

Teaching is DIDASKON, which signifies teaching with authority. Teaching
communicates and elucidates principles, leaving the motivation to
students.

Preaching is KERUSSON, which signifies teaching with exhortation.
Preaching is much more pushy than teaching; it cajoles and inspires to
action.

When Christ went into the synagogues, He taught. The atmosphere in the
synagogue demanded that method. It is opposite of what we are used to in
our churches, but imagine that the synagogue is a school, and you will
have a grasp of the situation.

When Christ was in the open air, He preached so as to motivate the
crowds, especially regarding the good news of the kingdom.

The kingdom was good news - it was His offer of a millennial rule to the
people of Israel.

And Jesus Christ was motivational in His speaking. You can well imagine
just how skilled He was. He surely must have been a marvel at preaching,
considering His knowledge and insight into Scripture.

Furthermore, He was authenticating all of this with His healing
ministry, and every disease and illness was healed by Him. They all
powerfully pointed to the healing of the cross.

“Now seeing the crowds He had compassion concerning them, because they
had become completely distressed and downcast like sheep without a
shepherd.”

Now this is a first indeed. The crowds have been a hindrance to Christ,
and always something to avoid. He has had places to go and sermons to
preach. Always the crowd is in the way; always they have the wrong
motivation for seeing Him.

The present participle IDON is from the root verb HORAO, which means to
both see and understand. Christ saw something for the first time in the
crowd that He had been seeing all along. Christ has not changed, but the
crowd finally has. Now for the first time they are developing a desire
for a relationship with God.

He identifies that there is a leadership vacuum among them - that they
are like sheep without a shepherd. And He has compassion for them. The
word is ESPLAGCHNISTHE, which means ‘guts,’ the innermost part of man.
Deep inside Himself, our Lord had emotion toward the crowd.

Two pluperfect periphrastic participles describe the countenance of the
crowd in the strongest of terms.

This peculiar grammatical construction of the Greek language focuses the
reader’s attention on the action of the verb. This time, it is
pluperfect, so it concentrates on a perfect state in the past. The
proper translation is “They had become utterly…”

The first participle is ESKULMENOI, which means to be harassed. The
original meaning of the verb SKULLO is to ‘flay.’ So when the bad news
of life come one after another, it like being skinned. So Christ scans
the crowd, and they look like they’ve been skinned by the events of
their day.

The second is ERRIMMENOI, which comes from HRIPTO. This verb has a broad
etymology with a common theme.

(1) The original idea was to toss away garbage - to throw away anything
that was no longer useful.

(2) The Greeks employed this verb to denote a newborn child that had
been ‘exposed’ by the parents - left out in the elements as a kind of
post-partum form of abortion. The modern equivalent is tossing a newborn
into a dumpster.

(3) It also came to describe the sick person who is cast down by his
illness, and yet one more thing.

(4) It described the abandoned flock, which with no shepherd would just
lie down and wait whatever disaster would come their way.

So now this is the flip side of their lack of direction, and their
constant distortion and ignorance of Christ’s ministry.

This was a generation of Jews who were lost. They had no decent
leadership in the whole country. They had an identity as a people, and
understood their glorious past and their great destiny. But it wasn’t
happening.

(1) They had David and Solomon looking over their shoulders; the
pressure of the glory of the past, and the promise of the great kingdom
of the future.

(2) That promise represented pressure on this generation, because of the
failure of the Maccabean times, and the pressure and exploitation of
Rome.

(3) This generation knew that they were slaves to Rome; they knew it
whenever they saw the Roman fighting man in uniform; whenever they
looked and saw another one of Herod’s buildings; whenever they paid
taxes.

(4) And they knew that they had not been equipped for greatness by their
own leadership. Although the Scribes and Pharisees had attempted to put
an iron grip on them through guilt and their monopoly on the temple,
they had failed.

(5) These rugged and rebellious Galileans knew that the Pharisees were
to a certain extent a sham, and they did not have such a great effect on
them. This points out the moral dimension of leadership - that honest
people will not follow corrupt leadership.

(6) And the Roman leadership was morally corrupt to an extreme. The
Herodian dynasty of the region has seldom been exceeded in history for
the issue of immoral degeneracy, just as the Pharisees have seldom been
exceeded for the issue of moral degeneracy. It was that kind of time.

(7) But they were all thinking - what do we have to do to be free? What
do we have to do to get what God has promised?

(8) So there is a real leadership vacuum among the people of this region
at this time, and the people of the region have been cast out like
garbage, so that they are exceedingly depressed.

But let’s consider why they have not followed Christ - at least up to
this point.

(1) We can classify Jesus Christ as the greatest leader of all time; and
these Galilean crowds are like sheep without a shepherd. Then why hasn’t
Christ become their shepherd?

(2) Christ’s leadership begins in the spiritual realm; it requires a
relationship with God the Father through Him in order to work.

(3) Furthermore, our Lord is leading into a spiritual realm. The content
of His preaching about the kingdom concentrates on the spiritual
distinctions of His kingdom.

(4) Yes, these crowds are in a leadership vacuum, but they neither do
they want to go where Christ is leading.

(5) There are many unbelievers here, as evidenced by how many believe
for the first time when they are healed by Christ, or when they meet Him
personally.

(6) But even Christ’s disciples have trouble with the parables, and with
faith that goes beyond salvation.

“Then He says to His disciples, The harvest is great, but the workers
few; therefore bind the Lord of the harvest so as to cast out workers
into His harvest.”

Christ identifies the possibility of positive volition among these
crowds. He knows that their mode of function is according to their
cosmic frame of reference.

That is, He makes a mature evaluation of their cosmic modus operandi.
“Cosmic people act like it.” These crowds are living under the authority
of their cosmic frame of reference and responding as expected. Christ
decides not to judge them for this, but rather to see their potential
contained within their volition.

He considers this harvest to be great. He considers the historical
trends involved with these people, and determines that they are the kind
of people that are ripe for the gospel.

There were thousands of people that followed Christ; not to far in the
future, He will feed five thousand of them.

But why doesn’t He just give them the gospel while they are gathered
about Him at every stop? A crowd is an efficient gathering. He could
just do this, and wham! They will all become believers.

Part of the answer is that the workers are few. Christ is a worker; His
disciples are workers, but they are few. He says this in such a way as
to make them understand that although His preaching and teaching are
excellent, there is a need among them to receive evangelism in a more
personal way.

Principle: people who are in the cosmic system are weak. A combination
of things must fall together in order for a person to believe in Jesus
Christ, or to turn their lives around from reversionism.

They must have come to a point of humility, of readiness in their lives.
This is the abode of God. He is the one who works the circumstances of
lives so that men are humble.

They must hear the gospel by one means or another. Sometimes a person
will wait for just the right method before they will respond. This is a
reflection of their weakness that they want to hear the gospel on their
own terms.

1 Corinthians 9 has a brief passage on the principle of meeting people
where they are. Let’s go there.

Christ employs the imperative mood of the verb DEETHETE to communicate a
command. The meaning of the word is ‘bind,’ ‘tie,’ or even ‘compel.’ The
idea is that you force someone to do something.

Again Christ communicates the idea commanding God the Father with
reference to prayer. This also was very clear in the Lord’s prayer,
where so many of the clauses were in the imperative mood of command.

The idea exists in Christ’s mind because He has a perfect understanding
of the integrity of God.

(1) God’s integrity is His perfect attitude toward His own
communication. God is always honest and forthright and clear in the way
that He communicates.

(2) And God the Father always keeps His word. What Christ says here is
that we need to take advantage of that divine veracity, and because God
the Father will keep His word, we can bind Him to it.

So what is the principle of binding with regard to the gospel?

(1) God is not willing that any should perish but for all to come to
repentance - 2 Peter 3:9.

(2) There are many in the crowd willing to listen to the gospel if it is
brought to them personally.

(3) There aren’t enough workers to bring in the abundant gospel harvest.

(4) God can find the workers - it is His realm. So - keep God to His
word; He will be faithful.

He asks them to pray for the Lord to ‘cast out,’ EKBALLO, workers into
the harvest. The idea is that the leadership of God is quite compelling.
The workers will be so impressed with the need, that they will go to the
harvest as though they were shot out of a catapult. God often leads in
this manner.

10. But there is one more principle at work here. When you want someone
to do something, have them pray for the fulfillment of that need.

This is a fine principle of leadership. Christ told His disciples to
pray, and He did it with a great smile and a gleam in His eye, because
He know that they must be the harvesters.

Of course the next incident in the life of Christ is the commissioning
of the twelve for their work of the harvest. When you compare the
commissioning with this prayer, you can see what Christ is doing.

Christ sees a need, and the men who can fulfill that need. He figures
that if He can get them to pray for the fulfillment of the need, the
Lord will do the rest. And indeed God is faithful to His word, and the
twelve disciples are willing.

The Commissioning of the Twelve
-------------------------------

Matthew 10:1-42

Mark 6:7-11

Luke 9:1-5

Outline.

The Disciples and Their Mission.

The summons, the organization, the empowerment, and the purpose. “And
after calling together His twelve disciples He began to send them out
two by two and He gave to them power and authority over unclean spirits
so as to cast them out and to heal every disease and every malady. And
He sent them to preach the Kingdom of God and heal the weak.”

The personnel. “Now the names of the twelve apostles are these: first
Simon the one named Peter and Andrew his brother, and James the son of
Zebedee and John his brother, Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew
the tax-collector, James the son of Alphaeus and Thaddeus, Simon the
Cananean and Judas the Iscariot who also betrayed Him.”

The Personal Instructions for the Mission.

Instructions for the way.

The objective people of the mission. “Jesus sent the twelve out after He
gave them personal instruction, saying, ‘Do not go out into the way of
the Gentiles and do not go into the city of the Samaritans; but go
rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. “

The content of the message. “And as you are going, preach, saying, ‘Near
is the Kingdom of Heaven.’”

The empowerment of the message. “Heal the weak, raise the dead, cleanse
the lepers, cast out demons; freely you received, give freely.”

The demand of grace on the recipients of the message. “Do not acquire
gold nor silver nor copper for your money belts, nor a bag for the way
nor two coats nor sandals nor an [extra] staff, for worthy is the worker
of his wages.”

The general procedure in the villages. “And into whichever ever city or
village you enter, find out who in it is worthy, and remain there until
you depart. And while entering the house, greet it. And if indeed the
house is worthy, let your peace come upon it, but if it is not worthy,
let your peace return to you. And whoever does not receive you nor
listen to your words, while exiting the house or that city shake the
dust out of your feet as a testimony against them. Truly I say to you,
it will be better for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
judgment than for that city.”

The Hazards of the Mission, and their Remedies.

The hazard of the disciples’ naivete’. “Behold I send you out as sheep
in the midst of wolves; therefore become intelligent as the serpents and
innocent as doves. And pay close attention to men; For they will betray
you to the courts and they will scourge you in their synagogues.”

The weakness of the disciples’ words. “And you will be led before
governors and even kings for My sake to testify to them and to the
Gentiles. But whenever they give you over, do not care how or what you
might speak; For it will be given to you in that hour what you might
speak; for you are not the ones speaking but the Spirit of your Father
Who speaks in you.”

The hazard of betrayal from within the family. “And a brother will
betray a brother unto death and a father a child, and children will rise
up against parents and kill them. And you will be hated by all because
of My name; but the one who remains until the end, this one will be
saved.”

Divine guidance through persecution. “And whenever they persecute you in
this city, flee into the next; for truly I say to you, you will not
complete the cities of Israel until the Son of man comes.”

Preparation for persecution. “A disciple is not above his teacher, nor
is a slave above his master. It is enough for the disciple that he
become like his teacher and the slave like his master. If they have
called the ruler of the house Beelzebub, how much worse they will call
the household members!”

Words of encouragement and assurance of vindication.

The assurance of eternal vindication. “Therefore do not fear them; for
there is nothing having been concealed that will not be revealed and
hidden which will not be made known.

The encouragement toward forthrightness. “What I say to you in the dark
you say in the light, and what you hear [whispered] in the ear, you
preach upon the housetops.”

The distinctions regarding temporal and eternal loss. “And do not fear
from the ones who kill the body, but who does not have the power to kill
the soul; but fear rather the one who has power to kill both the soul
and the body in Gehenna. Aren’t two sparrows sold for a cent? Yet one of
them does not fall upon the ground apart from your Father. And indeed
every hair of your head is numbered. Therefore do not fear; you
yourselves are much different from sparrows.”

The reassurance of eternal vindication. “Therefore everyone who
confesses in me before men, I will confess also in them before My Father
Who is in heaven; And whoever denies Me before men, I will also deny him
before My Father Who is in heaven.”

The divisive nature of the Kingdom of God. “Do not think that I came to
cast peace upon the earth; I did not come to cast peace but a sword. For
I came to set a man against his father, and daughter against her mother,
and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law, and a man’s enemies are
his household-members.”

The results of the priorities according to the divisions. “The one who
love his father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me, and the one
who loves a son or daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me; and who
does not take his cross and follow after Me, he is not worthy of Me. The
one who find his soul destroys it, and the one who destroys his soul in
my behalf finds it.”

The reward of the faithful. “The one who receives you receives Me, and
the one who receives Me receives the one who sent Me. The one who
receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive the profit of a
prophet, and the one who receives a righteous man in the name of a
righteous man will receive the reward of a righteous man. And whoever in
the name of a disciple gives to one of these little ones even a cup of
cold water, truly I say to you, he will certainly not lose his reward!”

II. Exposition.

The Disciples and Their Mission.

The summons, the organization, the empowerment, and the purpose. “And
after calling together His twelve disciples He began to send them out
two by two and He gave to them power and authority over unclean spirits
so as to cast them out and to heal every disease and every malady. And
He sent them to preach the Kingdom of God and heal the weak.”

As you may recall, Christ and the twelve are embarked on a circuit of
the towns of Galilee. At one of the stops along the way, He summons them
together, which is portrayed by the verb PROSKALEO.

His strategy was to send them out two by two. This detail we gain in
Mark’s gospel, where it says DUO. When you come back to Matthew’s gospel
and examine the list of disciples there, you will notice right away that
they are listed in pairs.

(1) These are the operational pairs of this new gospel ministry. Christ
intended to send them out like a reverse ark, two by two into the world.

(2) This convention of Christ’s sets up a system of responsibility and
support for each pair. They may rely on one another for many things in
the course of their travels, but it would mostly be encouragement to
carry out the mission.

Christ equipped each man with power and authority to cast out demons and
heal every disease and every malady.

(1) This was the same power which Christ had, and which came ultimately
from God the Holy Spirit.

(2) Notice the coupling of power and authority that comes from Luke’s
gospel. Luke thought it important to reinforce the principle of
authority in the wielding of power.

(3) Paul had this to say about authority in Romans 13:1-2: “(1) Let
every soul subordinate himself to the ruling authorities. For there is
no legitimate authority except through God, and the present authorities
have been established through God. (2) Therefore the one who disobeys
legitimate authority opposes what God has delegated, and those who
oppose will bring judgement on themselves.”

(a) EXOUSIA occurs here as ‘legitimate authority.’ It is a word that
denotes individual rights, and the liberty to decide for oneself.

(b) It also describes the ability to exercise power and authority. In
this use there is the connotation of skill and even Divine right.

(c) Finally, it indicates legitimate authority, which is given within
the framework of the laws of Divine establishment.

(4) This would function just the same as it did in the ministry of
Christ - to validate and illustrate.

(a) As validation, these powers would clearly point out that they were
from God, and therefore validate their kingdom message.

(b) As illustration, they would point to the purpose of the first advent
of the Messiah, which was to heal the great ailment of mankind, total
depravity in sin.

And then Luke weighs in again with an important detail - that He sent
them out to preach the kingdom and heal the weak.

(1) Now in Luke’s gospel, there already exists a mention of the healing
ministry, and so it seem a little redundant to mention it again in the
very next sentence. But Luke is not the redundant type.

(2) The word for weak is ASTHENEIA, which may have three different
meanings, depending on the context.

(a) Physical weakness. Usually this is due to some physical ailment.

(b) Sickness or illness. This is a pretty common use of the word.

(c) The weakness or helplessness of the sinful state, divided into two
categories:

· The weakness of total depravity prior to salvation.

· The weakness of being out of fellowship after salvation.

(3) Here ASTHENEIA focuses on total depravity, and so Christ had an
evangelistic purpose for this mission to go alongside the kingdom
purpose. The ultimate purpose was the kingdom purpose.

The personnel. “Now the names of the twelve apostles are these: first
Simon the one named Peter and Andrew his brother, and James the son of
Zebedee and John his brother, Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew
the tax-collector, James the son of Alphaeus and Thaddeus, Simon the
Cananean and Judas the Iscariot who also betrayed Him.”

See the doctrine of the twelve disciples.

There is not much to say about these pairings other than was is readily
apparent from observation.

It is in Matthew’s gospel that we would expect to find the most insight
on the life of Thomas, because they were ministry partners for this
period.

Christ also exercises wisdom in pairing the brothers Peter and Andrew,
and James and John. Since they all had been in business together,
working together in evangelism would have been natural.

Philip and Bartholomew would also have been an interesting combination,
since both these men had Gentile names, and there was a strong
possibility at least for Bartholomew to be a Gentile. And now they were
missionaries to the wayward Jews. There is more than a little irony in
this possibility.

The Personal Instructions for the Mission.

Instructions for the way.

The objective people of the mission. “Jesus sent the twelve out after He
gave them personal instruction, saying, ‘Do not go out into the way of
the Gentiles and do not go into the city of the Samaritans; but go
rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”

(1) Christ has a fair set of instructions for His disciples; He knows
that they are embarked on something new, and it will be a great
challenge for them.

(2) For nearly two years they have had the opportunity to observe Christ
in action in everything that they are about to do. They have had the
perfect example of a gospel ministry set before them almost every day.
There is not one thing in this set of commands that Christ has not lived
every day for the past two years.

(3) And now they receive His personal instruction. The verb is
PARAGGELLO in the Greek, and it actually draws meaning from the military
realm. Literally, it is, ‘to send from beside you.’ So it has the idea
of giving orders and then sending them out to execute those orders.

(4) But here along with those orders is some excellent communication on
what to expect. Christ does not simply give orders and expect them to
obey in rote fashion.

(5) By communicating clearly Christ gives them flexibility, and more
importantly, the courage that they need to fulfill their mission.

(6) There are three racial categories here: the Gentiles, the
half-Jewish Samaritans, and the full sons of Abraham, the Jews.

(a) God never makes an issue out of race, and Christ never meant to
imply that those other groups were unworthy of the gospel.

(b) If you recall, Christ has already participated in giving the gospel
to the Samaritan woman of John chapter four, and He did indeed do the
same thing when He healed the Gentile centurion’s servant in Matthew 8.

(7) There is no prejudice here whatsoever. But it is Christ’s objective
to bring the lost sheep of Israel back into the fold. The people have
gone astray.

(8) The people of Israel are called the sheep in Psalm 100:3, “Know that
the Lord Himself is God; it is He who has made us, and not we ourselves;
we are His people and the sheep of His pasture.”

(9) The very last verse of the 119th Psalm contains the lost sheep
metaphor: “I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek Your servant, for
I do not forget Your commandments.”

(10) Jeremiah 23:1-6 is especially compelling, because it is the
prophecy of this action: “(1) ‘Woe to the shepherds who are destroying
and scattering the sheep of My pasture!’ declares the Lord. (2)
Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel concerning the shepherds who
are tending My people: ‘You have scattered My flock and driven them
away, and have not attended to them; behold, I am about to attend to you
for the evil of your deeds,’ declares the Lord. (3) ‘Then I Myself will
gather the remnant of My flock out of all the countries where I have
driven them and bring them back to their pasture, and they will be
fruitful and multiply. (4) I will also raise up shepherds over them and
they will tend them; and they will not be afraid any longer, nor be
terrified, nor will any be missing,’ declares the Lord. (5) ‘Behold, the
days are coming,’ declares the Lord, ‘When I will raise up for David a
righteous Branch; and he will reign as king and act wisely and do
justice and righteousness in the land. (6) In His days Judah will be
saved, and Israel will dwell securely; and this is His name by which He
will be called, ‘The Lord our righteousness.’” Jeremiah 50:6-7, 17, 44
say a few of the same things.

(a) God places responsibility squarely on the heads of the shepherds of
the land. This is the religious leadership of the time.

(b) Jeremiah was the prophet of the destruction of Judah, the southern
kingdom of Israel. He witnessed their final discipline at the hands of
Babylon.

(c) Verses five and six look at the Messiah of Israel. He is the one who
will bring together the scattered flock and lost sheep of Israel. Here
then is more messianic identification by Christ.

(d) There is a spiritual prerequisite for the restoration of Israel;
this is what the Jews of Christ’s time refused to realize.

(e) The sheep of Christ’s time are scattered and lost because of the
Pharisees and the Sadducees. Their religious and moral degeneracy has
caused the flock, the common people of Israel to go astray.

(f) Christ aims His disciples at the lost sheep of Israel so that they
will be gathered once again under His shepherding Messiahship.

(g) This will ultimately occur at the second advent, and careful study
of verses three and four will reveal the regathering of Israel as the
second advent, and the rule of the shepherds as the millennium.

(h) Currently, God is raising up shepherds in the form of mature church
age believers. We will be the undershepherds of Christ’s millennial
rule. That these undershepherds would be Gentiles was not a decided
issue at the time of the prophecy.

(11) Ezekiel chapter thirty-four is a prophecy against the shepherds of
Israel, the religious leadership of Israel which had failed their flock.
This failed leadership was again and again the reason for the lost
sheep.

(12) There is an echo here from Isaiah 53:6, “All of us like sheep have
gone astray, each of us has turned to his own way; but the Lord has
caused the iniquity of us all to fall on Him.”

(13) Zechariah 10:2-4 is very much like the Jeremiah 23 passage: “(2)
For the teraphim speak iniquity, and the diviners see lying visions and
tell false dreams; they comfort in vain. Therefore the people wander
like seep, they are afflicted, because there is no shepherd. (3) My
anger is kindled against the shepherds, and I will punish the male
goats; for the Lord the hosts has visited His flock, the house of Judah,
and will make them like His majestic horse in battle. (4) From them will
come the cornerstone, from them the tent peg, from them the bow of
battle, from them every ruler, all of them together.”

The content of the message. “And as you are going, preach, saying, ‘Near
is the Kingdom of Heaven.’”

(1) This is a truly honest statement, because there is the potential of
having the two advents of Christ separated only by about seven years.
The tribulation and second advents are still an option for God because
the volition of Israel has not completely rejected Christ.

(2) So the kingdom of heaven is truly near in a chronological sense to
the nation of Israel. Israel has a real opportunity to live in the
kingdom during their lifetimes.

(3) In a secondary sense the kingdom is near even today. It is near for
all individuals because of the imminence of death, and because of the
imminence of the rapture.

(4) And Matthew wanted his Jewish readers to understand this with
clarity. He employs the adverb of time EGGIKEN to do so.

(5) This has a remarkable similarity to a more famous passage in the
28th chapter of Matthew. It is worth placing here. Matthew 28:18-20:
“All authority was given to me in heaven and on earth. Therefore after
going instruct all the Gentiles, baptizing them into the name of the
Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, teaching them to keep all which
I commanded you. And behold I myself am with you all the days until the
conclusion of the age [dispensation].”

(a) This passage contains one command - that the disciples should
disciple all the Gentiles. The Greek word MATHETEUSATE (disciple) is the
only one in the true imperative mood in the passage. This verb means to
instruct, or teach someone.

(b) This command is directed to Christ’s disciples alone, but it extends
well to every church age believer.

(c) The command to instruct is based on the authority of Christ. All
authority was given to Him in heaven and on earth. The passive voice of
DIDOMI indicates that Christ did not act on his own divine authority,
but took that which was given to him by the father.

(d) This was the authority to offer the millennial kingdom to the Jews.
Now this authority is transferred to the Gentiles. So the realm of
authority is knowledge and instruction. It is important to note that the
disciples were not given the authority to bring in the kingdom by
themselves. The beginning of the kingdom is not dependent on human
agency.

(e) The command to instruct has a certain quality of lifestyle. The
aorist participle POREUTHENTES shows that this action precedes the
command to instruct. It is similar but not identical to our passage in
Matthew 10.

(f) There is no command to go. It is assumed that these disciples will
go out into the world. With regard to geography, God leads and you end
up there. With regard to methodology, God commands.

(g) The command to instruct is more fully explained by two present
participles. The action of a present participle occurs at the same time
as the main verb of the sentence. No matter what else you understand
from the two participles, understand that they are simply giving a full
explanation of the way in which the instruction is to take place.

· The first participle is BAPTIZONTES, which is from BAPTIZO ‘really
baptize’.

- This is not the literal water baptism, but a ‘change by immersion,’
which is closer to the original meaning of the word. The change is
inward, and it has to do with character.

- The phrase ‘into the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy
Spirit’ describes the kind of change that is to take place.

- The Greek word ONOMA is our English name. In the ancient way of
thinking, a ‘name’ represented the true nature of its bearer. It was not
just a label or designation without meaning, used to separate one from
all others.

- In the Hebrew way of thinking a person’s name revealed his character,
personality, and even destiny.

- The preposition EIS denotes change. Usually it shows movement from one
place to another, but here it reveals movement from human, worldly
character to the divine.

- The change in the believer is brought about by immersion into the
divine character. This can only take place by faith perception - the
MATHETEUO command already mentioned.

· The second participle is DIDASKONTES, which means to teach with
authority. This more properly describes both the MATHETEUO and the
BAPTIZONTES. These two participles are not separate commands, but
explanations of one command. They both depend on that command.

(h) The first part of the explanation tells us that the discipleship is
to be a change by immersion into the divine character. The second part
tells us how that immersion is to take place - teaching with authority.

(i) The Gentiles are to be taught to keep all that Christ had commanded
the disciples. They are to be taught how to be obedient to the commands
of Christ.

(j) Note that teaching precedes obedience. You cannot be obedient
without the truth. Obedience cannot logically precede faith perception,
because faith perception is the prerequisite for any obedience.

(k) Christ then gives a final word of encouragement. “and behold I
myself am with you all the days until the conclusion of the age.”

The empowerment of the message. “Heal the weak, raise the dead, cleanse
the lepers, cast out demons; freely you received, give freely.”

(1) So along with the power and authority comes a command to use it.

(2) Key to this command is the rationale - grace overflows. If you
received freely, that is, if you had grace orientation as the recipient
of grace, then there is a compulsion to give as freely as you have
given.

(3) There is a little insight to be gained by observing the Greek adverb
which is translated ‘freely’ here. It is DOREAN, which comes from the
noun ‘gift.’

(4) A gift is something that you give free charge, no strings attached.

(5) Christ has invested the disciples with great power; spectacular
power. They could easily convert this into many forms of personal
advantage: money-making, womanizing, political advantage - you name it.

(6) But no price is ever to be attached to the gospel; no price in any
way.

(7) There are many applications in the modern world, even after the
temporary spiritual gifts have ceased.

(a) Any kind of church ministry cannot charge money in exchange for
anything that includes the gospel or is associated with their ministry.

(b) Christian music is especially criminal today; any concert or musical
media that places a price on its product is wrong! It is anti-grace to
set a price on what God has freely given.

(c) I am quite sure that our Lord would consider today’s Christian music
industry one with the moneychangers of the temple. He would clear them
out! Every one of them is going to be accountable to the judgment seat
of Christ for their mixture of the gospel with money.

(d) Music is a very powerful medium for the gospel, and its power is not
too far distant from the power of the temporary spiritual gifts.

(e) In similar fashion, the permanent spiritual gifts of pastor-teacher
and evangelism carry with them power and authority, and can be used to
personal advantage in every category. And yet no exchange is to be
associate with them.

(8) Acts chapter eight records Peter’s response to a solicitation to
exchange money for the power of the Holy Spirit. Acts 8:9-24 has the
record, “(9) Now there was a man named Simon, who formerly was
practicing magic in the city and astonishing the people of Samaria,
claiming to be someone great; (10) and they all, from smallest to
greatest, were giving attention to him, saying, ‘This man is what is
called the Great Power of God.’ (11) And they were giving him attention
because he had for a long time astonished them with his magic arts. (12)
But when they believed Philip preaching the good news about the kingdom
of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were being baptized, men and
women alike. (13) Even Simon himself believed; and after being baptized,
he continued on with Philip, and as he observed signs and great miracles
taking place, he was constantly amazed. (14) Now when the apostles in
Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent
them Peter and John, (15) who came down and prayed for them that they
might receive the Holy Spirit. (16) For He had not yet fallen upon any
of them; they had simply been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
(17) Then they began laying their hands on them, and they were receiving
the Holy Spirit. (18) Now when Simon saw that the Spirit was bestowed
through the laying on of the apostles’ hands, he offered them money,
(19) saying, ‘Give this authority to me as well, so that everyone on
whom I lay my hands may receive the Holy Spirit.’ (20) But Peter said to
him, ‘May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could
obtain the gift of God with money! (21) You have no part or portion in
this matter, for you heart is not right before God. (22) Therefore
repent of this wickedness of yours, and pray the Lord that, if possible,
the intention of your heart may be forgiven you. (23) For I see that you
are in the gall of bitterness and in the bondage of iniquity.’ (24) But
Simon answered and said, ‘Pray to the Lord for me yourselves, so that
nothing of what you have said may come upon me.’”

(a) It is apparent that Simon the Magician had the lust pattern of
approbation. As an unbeliever, he wanted to be known as someone great;
but he was a charlatan - his magic was not real.

(b) Then one day Christian men give the gospel to his audience, and they
believe. Magicians are skeptics, and they are experts on what is truth
and what is a lie. That Simon the Magician believes in Jesus Christ is
one of the greatest testimonies in the New Testament. After living a lie
all his life, Simon sees his crowds follow the gospel, and he knows the
real deal. He has an honest moment, and is saved forever.

(c) And then something even greater happens, the Holy Spirit comes upon
them, and Simon the skeptical magician sees something truly supernatural
for the first time in his life. And he responds in an entirely cosmic
manner - he wants the approbation that will go with this kind of power.

(d) He does not really want money. That was not his area of weakness.

(e) So he offers money for the power of the Spirit, and here is where
Peter steps in with strong words and complete integrity. He will not
allow this trespass on God’s power. That power does not exist to further
man’s ambition, and it is not ever for sale.

(f) Those who desire to further God’s kingdom with pure motives never
have to buy the power, and those who have the information to do so never
want to sell it.

(g) Only a man who was apart from grace orientation would want to buy
what was freely given.

(9) John 2:13-16 reinforces this idea. The incident of the cleansing of
the temple occurred at the very beginning of Christ’s ministry.

(a) Verse 13, “And the Passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up
into Jerusalem”

· The Passover had to be a rather poignant time for Christ. On His mind
would rest the burden of the sins of the world, for He knew that He
would have to pay for them in the not too distant future.

· He was expecting to go into the temple and worship God, and remember
His role in saving mankind.

(b) Verse 14, “And He found in the temple the ones who were selling oxen
and sheep and doves, and the ones who were seated, the money changers.”

· The temple had become the very center of an extremely corrupt system.
It was the ultimate monopoly, and the evil priests manipulated that
monopoly into a money-making machine.

· The Law proscribed that only sacrifices without spot or blemish were
worthy for sacrifice in the temple.

· The chief priests manipulated this by making sure that no one had a
worthy animal. They sent their inspectors to school for months so that
they could identify the defects of any given animal. Actually this just
became an excuse for disqualifying the animals brought by the heads of
households.

· They also came to charge the people for the inspection of their
animals. This evil led many to just give up and buy the animals that the
temple provided, without even trying to bring their own.

· This was wrong, wrong, wrong. The whole point of the sacrifice was
that it would come from the family; that the man would know the animal
personally; that he would see the cost of sin, and greatness of God’s
sacrifice in sending His own Son.

· Of course the prices on these animals was greatly inflated, and the
chiefs priests made a great profit from them.

· Furthermore, the chief priests and officials made it so that the
animals could only be bought with the official temple currency, and the
exchange rates were quite exorbitant. Thus, the moneychangers.

· With the clinking of coins and the mutter of exchange and the
baa-ahing of sheep and the cooing of pigeons and the mooing of cattle
you could hardly hear yourself think in the house of worship. There was
record of more than three thousand head of sheep in the temple at one
time. What cacophony! What corruption!

· So, Christ walks into His Father’s house, the house designed for
learning about His sacrifice, and He finds the worst kind of corruption.
What follows is not an act of anger, but justice.

(c) Verse 15, “And He made a scourge from ropes and He cast all of them
out from the temple and the sheep and the oxen, and He poured out the
coins of the money-changers and He overturned the tables.”

· Physical wreckage is much preferred over spiritual corruption.

· There were a bunch of money-changers, and only one Christ, but they
did not attempt to stop Him.

· Was Christ an imposing figure, or were they so shocked by this action
that they did not respond?

· The scourge of ropes could have been a fearful weapon, when wielded by
one with skill. How did our peaceful Lord acquire such experience?

· Christ had been a carpenter by trade. It is likely that He had great
strength in His hands and arms, because the profession was even more
rigorous then than it is now.

· John rather humorously adds the driving out of the sheep and oxen; he
makes a funny because you already expected them to be driven out. Christ
drives out the wimpy bankers and money-changers and inspectors, and even
the oxen and sheep. He drives them like the stupid cattle they are.

· By pouring out the coins and overturning the tables, Christ made it
impossible for them to determine whose money belonged to whom. He
effectively destroyed their profits.

(d) Verse 16, “And to those who were selling doves, He said, ‘Remove
these things from here [in any direction], do not make the house of My
Father a house of merchandise.’”

(e) This decisive action of Christ’s demonstrates His total belief in
the grace system. It is clear that the Pharisees were attempting to take
advantage of the people in order to make a profit.

(f) Christ considers this heinous enough to take violent action against.
Even when the people of Nazareth or the Pharisees come against Him to
kill Him, Christ does not react in violence. But here He does.

The demand of grace on the recipients of the message. “Do not acquire
gold nor silver nor copper for your money belts, nor a bag for the way
nor two coats nor sandals nor an [extra] staff, for worthy is the worker
of his food.”

(1) Now here is the other half of the equation. The gospel worker is not
to allow the villages to take advantage of him. He is to take only what
is absolutely necessary for the journey, and nothing else.

(2) The idea is that God will motivate logistics through grace-oriented
believers, so that they have enough to live.

(3) This is apparently a proverb of the day that Christ employs for the
benefit of His disciples.

(4) The key phrase is AXIOS HO ERGATES TES TROPHES AUTOU.

(a) The ERGATES was the agricultural laborer of the day. It was
acceptable for the agricultural worker to eat from the plants which he
harvested, and to provide food logistics for his family in this manner.

(b) TROPHES is food, the logistical supply of the worker. It is worth it
for the land owner to allow this to occur, because he benefits from the
work of the harvester.

(c) So the worker is AXIOS, ‘worthy’ of his food.

(5) In the same way the gospel worker is worth his logistics. The people
of the towns and villages of Galilee will so benefit from the ministry
of the disciples that they will gladly supply simple logistics.

(6) There is one issue of harmony that needs to be resolved. Matthew and
Luke both have Christ telling the disciples that they should not even
acquire a walking staff for their journey, while Mark says the staff is
the only exception.

(a) There is no linguistic resolution to this problem. The gospel of
Mark is very clear in its language regarding the staff exception.

(b) But Christ gave directions on more than one occasion, and in Mark’s
case, Christ decided it would be better at the time to take a single
staff. On another occasion, He told them to take no staff at all.

(c) Another possible solution comes through two figures of speech, the
hyperbole and the epanorthosis.

· With the hyperbole, Christ tells His disciples they are to take
nothing at all save the clothes on their back. He goes to an extreme by
saying ‘not even a staff.’

· Then for the sake of clarity He goes with the correction, or
epanorthosis. Mark’s gospel is the correction: a single staff.

The general procedure in the villages. “And into whichever ever city or
village you enter, find out who in it is worthy, and remain there until
you depart. And while entering the house, greet it. And if indeed the
house is worthy, let your peace come upon it, but if it is not worthy,
let your peace return to you. And whoever does not receive you nor
listen to your words, while exiting the house or that city shake the
dust out of your feet as a testimony against them. Truly I say to you,
it will be better for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
judgment than for that city.”

(1) Part one: find kingdom believers, and stay with them.

(a) EXETASATE means to inquire, or examine. The disciples are to go into
villages and ask around, verbally inquire as to who is AXIOS, worthy.

(b) AXIOS is pretty generic. But Christ does define worthiness in
Matthew 10:37-38. “(37) The one who love his father or mother more than
Me is not worthy of Me, and the one who loves a son or daughter more
than Me is not worthy of Me; (38) and who does not take his cross and
follow after Me, he is not worthy of Me.”

· So worthiness means that the person has Jesus Christ as his top
priority - above family, above everything.

· So we can define these as kingdom believers with momentum of spiritual
growth.

(c) And you can see that this is quite wise. The kingdom believers can
provide logistical support and spiritual encouragement. They may even
become active team members in the evangelistic efforts.

(d) Meetings may be held at their houses; they will be perfect for
follow-up on the new believers, supporting them and so on.

(2) Part two: testing procedures.

(a) The disciples are to go into a house, and give a greeting.

(b) Although the substance of the greeting is not specified, it is to be
one which enables the owner of the house to identify himself as a
kingdom believer.

(c) Any number of greetings may serve. Even just being straightforward
and saying, “Hi. Do you believe that Jesus is the Messiah?” would be
sufficient.

(d) In any event, there will be either a positive or a negative
response.

· With the positive response, the peace of the disciples is to come upon
the house.

· In the negative case, the peace is to return to the disciples.

· Whatever this peace may be, it is something that the disciples can
give or take back. It is genuinely up to them.

- The imperative of entreaty has Christ giving them a polite command
regarding the going and returning of peace. ELTHATO and EPISTRAPHETO are
the two imperative mood verbs here.

- Because of the imperative mood, you can see that the disciples have
the volitional power to bring this peace.

· Luke 7:50 and 8:48 give clues as to the true nature of this peace. In
each case, Christ tells someone He has just healed to go into peace.
They are to enter into the inner peace that comes with a good
relationship with God.

· The peace is going to be just like what the Greek word SUNANAPAUSOMAI
portrays in these verses:

- Romans 15:32, “…so that I may come to you in joy by the will of God
and find refreshing rest in your company.”

- 1 Corinthians 16:18, “For they have refreshed my spirit and yours.
Therefore acknowledge such men.”

- 2 Timothy 1:16, “The Lord grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for
he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my chains…”

- Philemon 7, “…because the hearts of the saints have been refreshed
through you, brother.”

· The peace is the refreshment that the disciples can bring to the
hearts of those with whom they stay. They eat meals and talk about
Christ and the Kingdom; they sit around at night before bedtime and do
the same. They share their enthusiasm as they relate their memories of
two years on the road with the Messiah.

· And of course it is a peaceful refreshment to these kingdom believers.
It is as close as many of them will get to the Messiah.

(3) Part three: testify against the unworthy.

(a) There is an act that is to symbolize an attitude toward the negative
people of Galilee.

(b) If they do not receive or listen to the kingdom ministry then some
action is to take place.

(c) The action is either to take place at the doorstep if the house is
negative, or at the edge of the village if the village is negative.

(d) They are to shake the dust from their sandals, so that those people
understand that the disciples do not want to have the least bit to do
with them. They even want to forget the dust that came from that house
or village.

(e) There is a completeness to this that is similar to the cremation
practice of the Old Testament. Cremation was authorized only to forget a
capital felon, and there was no burial, no monument, and no body.

(f) So people who reject the kingdom plan are to be totally forgotten.
The disciples are no longer to have anything to do with them at all.

(g) The verb EKTINAXATE is aorist. It portrays a simple action in the
past. The simplicity of that is the simplicity of forgetfulness.

(h) But there is more here than a vengeful shaking of dust. The focus on
forgetfulness also prevents the holding of grudges.

(i) Because negative people can become ugly, and do ugly things to those
who bring them the good news of the gospel.

(j) To be able to forget the abuse of the ungodly has also a purpose in
avoiding discouragement. By forgetting completely the people of the last
town, there is a new focus on the next. Maybe there will be positive
people in the next.

(k) The final comment, “Truly I say to you, it will be better for the
land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.”
harkens back to a similar saying that Christ put out against the cities
of northeastern Galilee, Chorazin and Bethsaida. This occurred in
Matthew 11:20-24: “(20) Then He began to denounce the cities in which
the most of His miracles appeared, because they did not repent: (21)
‘Woe to you, Chorazin, woe to you, Bethsaida; because if in Tyre and
Sidon the miracles which occurred appeared among you, they would have
long ago repented in sackcloth and ashes. (22) Therefore I say to you,
it will be more tolerable for Tyre and for Sidon in the day of judgment
than for you. (23) And you Capernaum, You will you be lifted as far as
heaven, will you? You will fall down as far as Hades… because if in
Sodom there appeared the miracles which appeared in you, it would have
remained until this day. (24) Therefore I say to you that it will be
more tolerable for the ground of Sodom in the day of judgment than for
you.”

(l) Since Sodom and Gomorrah were the extreme worst towns in Old
Testament times, it will be terrible for them in the days of judgment.
Just thinking of their earthly eradication as a preview for their
eternal judgment makes one quiver at the thought.

(m) And it will be worse for the villages that reject Christ.

The Hazards of the Mission, and their Remedies.

The hazard of the disciples’ naivete’. “Behold I send you out as sheep
in the midst of wolves; therefore become intelligent as the serpents and
innocent as doves. And pay close attention to men; For they will betray
you to the courts and they will scourge you in their synagogues.”

(1) The disciples are sheep, PROBATA. This focuses on their naivete,
their ignorance to the ways of the world. Even though they have been
with Christ for two years, and they have witnessed how awful people can
be to the Christian who is witnessing on behalf of his Savior, Christ
has been a buffer, protecting them from the worst.

(2) There are wolves in the world, LUKON. Lycanthrope, the werewolf, has
its origins in this world. There are people who are motivated to destroy
professing Christians.

(3) There are various expressions of the wolf:

(a) The motivation of the wolf is hatred for God. There can be a million
reasons for this in the mind of the wolf, but all are wrong. The wolf is
always deluded.

(b) There are those who are simply murderous; they desire to kill
Christians like the Neros of the world. These are the ones who lust for
power, and live in a lawless atmosphere.

(c) There are those who are slanderous; they love to lie and to destroy
the reputations of Christians. This can be done through mass media, or
on an individual basis.

(d) There are those who participate in seduction. They tempt Christians
to join them in their cosmic wallow - in adultery and fornication, in
greed, and in many other cosmic expressions.

(4) As a remedy, the disciples are to become intelligent as serpents.
The word ‘intelligent’ is from PHRONIMOI. This mirrors the Hebrew word
\`ARUM in Genesis 3:1 - “The serpent was more clever than any other
creature in the garden.” ARUM means intelligent in a clever way.

(a) PHRONIMOI is neutral; it is neither good nor bad - it depends on how
you apply the ability.

(b) They are to be intelligent as serpents, meaning that they should
come to understand the ways of their enemy, and avoid their attempts at
destroying them.

(5) They are also to be innocent as doves. But ‘innocent’ is really not
a very good translation of AKERAIOI.

(a) The alpha or ‘a’ at the beginning of the word is like our English
‘un.’ It negates the meaning of the word. This is called the alpha
privative in the Greek.

(b) It is literally, ‘without horns.’ The idea not of innocence, but of
a lack of dangerous ability.

(c) The disciples are not to be violent. They are to be like the dove,
who has no horns at all, and no way to defend himself.

(6) This combination of smarts and non-violence is designed to keep the
disciples intact through all the wolves of the world and their
destructive intent.

(7) They are to pay close attention to men, which is PROSECHETE.

(a) Men will betray them to the courts, the SUNEDRIA. These were the
highest Jewish courts in the land, where even capital punishment could
be meted out.

(b) Men will scourge them in the synagogues. The Sanhedrin was in
Jerusalem, and the synagogues were spread throughout Israel. This is the
lesser of the two punishment possibilities. The synagogue did not have
the legal power to bring capital punishment, but they could scourge
someone.

(c) And indeed these things, betrayal, scourging, and capital
punishment, would happen to Jesus Christ Himself. He would suffer what
possibilities He predicted for His disciples’ witnessing campaign.

(d) Paying close attention to men meant looking out for betrayal.
Betrayal would come from within - from close friends and even disciples.

(e) And Christ gave these instructions even to Judas Iscariot! How very
ironic that He warned the betrayer against betrayal.

(f) It is difficult to know whether Christ saw Judas as the betrayer
just yet. When it came down to the end, He knew it, but the betrayal is
still a year to the future.

The weakness of the disciples’ words. “And you will be led before
governors and even kings for My sake to testify to them and to the
Gentiles. But whenever they give you over, do not care how or what you
might speak; For it will be given to you in that hour what you might
speak; for you are not the ones speaking but the Spirit of your Father
Who speaks in you.”

(1) There is a great issue in the Messiah. He is to be the King of kings
and Lord of lords. He is therefore a threat to every ruler in the world,
whether petty or grand.

(2) The governors and kings will want to know of this Messiah of the
Jews, and to see if their own power and lifestyle is threatened.

(3) Both Jewish and Gentile leaders will want to know about Christ, and
the throne room can be such an intimidating place for fishermen and
laborers from the backwaters of Galilee.

(4) Bartholomew may be the only disciple who is in his element among the
aristocracy of the land.

(5) They have fine clothes, and fine speech. In the throne room there is
much evidence of wealth, and military power.

(6) They will stand in throne rooms, but they will be there as prisoners
and suspects; considered traitors of the ruler on the throne.

(7) And the words that the disciples speak will be in defense of
themselves and their Messiah. Their very lives will be at stake, and
them with only the speech of rugged Galileans.

(a) They will not have the gift of Paul, who testified before every
level of the governments of his time.

(b) Paul was a former member of the Sandhedrin, the high court of
Israel. He was skilled in speech and rhetoric; he understood the legal
subtleties of his day. As such, he was superior to Peter and the other
Galileans.

(8) Christ tells them of the grace gift of God related to speech - the
ministry of God the Holy Spirit.

(9) Principle: spiritual words and principles are superior to clothing
finery and aristocratic elocution.

(a) This is the exclusive realm of God the Holy Spirit. He is the one
who recalls truth from the soul.

(b) It is truth and truth alone that the disciples will need. The impact
of spirit-assisted truth in the souls of all men is a truly
awe-inspiring thing.

(10) The common grace ministry of the Spirit is not exactly the same as
this.

(a) You will notice that this ministry works within the speaker, aiding
him in what he will say.

(b) The common grace ministry of the Spirit is not subjective, but
objective: it works within the one spoken to. John 16:8-11 defines this
well: “(8) And He, when He comes, will convict the world concerning sin
and righteousness and judgment; (9) concerning sin, because they do not
believe in Me; (10) and concerning righteousness, because I go to the
Father and you no longer see Me; (11) and concerning judgment, because
the ruler of this world has been judged.”

(c) The common grace ministry is restricted to the church age; Christ
makes this clear by saying ‘when He comes…’ The Spirit was not
operational in this fashion while Christ was present on the earth, and
the ministry of Matthew Ten is operational during the disciples’
ministry at least a year before the absence of Christ could allow common
grace.

(11) This is a ministry that was available in the church age as
evidenced by the book of Acts 4:8, “Then Peter, filled with the Holy
Spirit, said to them…”

(12) Indeed, you may rely on the Spirit to work within you in much the
same way today.

(13) But understand that He can only use the truth that is present in
your soul - He will employ what you have truly digested as a Christian.

(14) There is great power in the testimony of metabolized truth. You as
a believer will have words of impressive quality if they include the
sure knowledge of their operational efficacy.

(15) How great it is to look someone level in the eye and tell them of
the wonders of God’s plan, and what He has done for you in grace.

(16) When Christ says to them, ‘For it will be given to you in that hour
what you might speak;’ He wants them to know that they may as well not
practice what they are going to say; that it holds no advantage. God the
Holy Spirit may have entirely something else in mind on that date.

(17) The only practice needed is the faith perception of the truth; that
much will be more than enough for the Spirit to use.

(18) Realizing that the Holy Spirit is speaking through you, and that
the speech does not originate in you will overcome any hurdles to
self-esteem that the speaker may have.

(19) It is therefore not you and your reputation that is on the line; it
is God the Holy Spirit’s.

The hazard of betrayal from within the family. “And a brother will
betray a brother unto death and a father a child, and children will rise
up against parents and kill them. And you will be hated by all because
of My name; but the one who remains until the end, this one will be
saved.”

(1) Christ now returns to the issue of the hazards. He makes it known
that the worst of the hazards will come from within the family.

(2) There will be betrayal - PARADOSEI - unto death. Not just handing
someone over for questioning, but even unto death.

(3) This points out how very threatening Christianity may become - how
awful the motivating hatred of God!

(4) Think about betraying your own brother to death because of what he
believes, or your child or parent! Yet this is the nature of the cosmic
system of Satan. This is what He aims to do.

(5) Of course, such hatred can never exist among Christians; Romans
12:18 makes it clear - “If possible, so far as it depends on you, be at
peace with all men.” We can have no hatred toward those whom we love, no
hatred toward those whom we wish to join us in our love for God and His
plan for our lives.

(6) This should give you an appreciation for the country in which you
live, because our persecution is so very little here. It is increasing,
but it is not a threat to our lives, thanks to the establishment
principles which underpin our laws. We are not yet hated by all because
of the precious name of our Savior.

(7) There are three main ways to reckon the verb SOZO in Scripture:

(a) As eternal salvation.

(b) As rescue from physical danger.

(c) As rescue from the moral decay in the cosmic system.

(d) This passage concentrates on the second in the list, the rescue from
physical danger.

(8) Because of this comment, it appears that this passage has a
tribulational cast to it; this principle at least has to do with that.

(9) Because Christ still sees the tribulation as reality for His
disciples, the ministry shift to the church has yet to occur.

Divine guidance through persecution. “And whenever they persecute you in
this city, flee into the next; for truly I say to you, you will not
complete the cities of Israel until the Son of Man comes.”

(1) This flight preserves life and allows the message to go on. The
objective of this mission is to save Israel from destruction by means of
spiritual strength.

(2) But this is not exactly like the flight of Israel in the tribulation
where the primary purpose is to save lives, period.

(3) A reminder of the way in which the disciples are to handle
persecution comes from the Sermon on the Mount: “Blessed are those who
have been persecuted for the sake of righteousness, because theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven. You are blessed whenever they insult you and
persecute you, and whenever they ostracize you and they insult you and
cast down your name as evil falsely for my sake. Rejoice and exult and
leap wildly, because your reward is great in heaven; for in the same way
they persecuted the prophets who were before you.”

(a) The preposition ENEKA describes an exchange of one thing for
another. A very literal translation would be, “Blessed are those who
have been persecuted in exchange for their righteousness.”

(b) Luke puts this same word in the exchange position with the Son of
Man - and so righteousness and the Son of Man are synonyms here.

(c) So, you have righteousness because you hungered and thirsted for it
(according to the previous beatitude), and as a result you receive
persecution.

(d) Or, you have a relationship with the Son of Man, and you receive
persecution because people hate Him and they express it toward you.

(e) The blessing for this is the kingdom of heaven. This seems curious
at first, because the same is awarded the poor in spirit no matter what
they might do.

(f) However, there is a contrast. In the first beatitude the emphasis
lay on eternal security. In this last one it is on eternity, period.

(g) If you suffer because you are Christian, it can lead to no small
amount of misery. A simple knowledge that the kingdom of heaven awaits
you is valuable indeed.

(h) This would be especially valuable for those who might have endured
the rigors of tribulational persecution - the kingdom of heaven would be
known to be only a few years off, at most.

(i) Principle: knowledge of eternity is the only real foundation of
happiness for those who are persecuted.

(j) Next comes the explanation. It begins with the phrase “you are
blessed”.

(k) Luke use four different ways to describe persecution:

· HOTAN MISESOSIN ANTHROPOI is ‘whenever men hate you.’ The verb ‘hate’
is MISESOSIN, and is a fairly square translation of the concept.

· HOTAN APHORISOSIN is literally ‘whenever they separate from you.’ The
idea is that others choose to separate themselves from you because of
your faith. Your friends and family leave you - your boss fires you -
your country banishes you.

· ONEIDISOSIN is next. It translates as reproach or revile, but
ultimately it comes down to slander. When you reproach another for his
legitimate and true faith, you slander his character and make a false
accusation.

· EKBALOSIN TO ONOMA HUMON HOS PONERON is the final persecution
possibility. It translates as ‘they cast out your name as evil’ This is
pretty much the same as the last one, with a little more emphasis on
general slander, as opposed to taking shots at Christianity.

(l) Then comes a command that is predicated on the persecution. ‘Rejoice
and exult and leap wildly, because your reward is great in heaven; for
in the same way they persecuted the prophets who were before you.’

(m) The reason for the rejoicing is the reward in heaven that waits for
those who endure undeserved suffering. Undeserved suffering leads to
great reward in heaven. And, therefore Christ commands His hearers to
rejoice when they encounter it.

(n) A further rationale for the rejoicing is that persecution is nothing
new, and that the prophets of old endured it as well. Persecution only
comes to those who do things right. Divine discipline goes to those who
are wrong, but the discipline is not aimed at your Christianity.

(o) The prophets of old did things rightly, and they received
persecution on account of it.

(4) The attitude toward the persecutors is revealed in Matthew 5:43 and
Luke 6:27-30, 32-36: “5:43 You heard that it was said, ‘Love your
neighbor’ and, ‘Hate your enemy’. 27 But I say to you who hear, ‘Love
your enemies, do well to those who hate you, 28 bless those who curse
you, pray for those who mistreat you. 29 to those who strike you on the
cheek, offer also the other, and from the one who takes away your shirt,
do not withhold also your tunic. 30 To everyone who asks of you give,
and from the one who takes what is yours do not ask for it back. 32 And
if you love the one who loves you, what kind of grace is to you? For the
sinners also love those who love them. 33 And if you do good to those
who do good to you, what kind of grace is to you? The sinners also do
the same thing. 34 And if you lend to the ones from whom you hope to
receive, what kind of grace? Sinners also lend to sinners to receive
their share. 35 Yet love your enemies and do good and lend expecting
nothing in return and your reward will be much, and you will be sons of
the Most High; for He Himself is gracious to the kind and ungrateful. 36
Become merciful just as also your Father is merciful.”

(a) The statements of Matthew 5:43 have a background from the Old
Testament.

· The love command is issued in Leviticus 19:17-18, “You shall not hate
your fellow countryman in your heart; you may surely reprove your
neighbor, but shall not incur sin because of him. You shall not take
vengeance, nor bear any grudge against the sons of your people, but you
shall love your neighbor as yourself; I am the Lord.”

· The hatred command is not directly from the Old Testament, but is a
misinterpretation of the doctrine of self-defense.

· The Old Testament authorized national self-defense and personal
self-defense. Sometimes in self-defense you must exercise lethal force,
and the interpreters of the day misconstrued this into hatred. Thus
‘Love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’

(b) The doctrine of self-defense will be abrogated during the millennial
rule of Jesus Christ. All thieves and thugs will be culpable before the
visible throne of the Son of God, and He will handle all matters of
justice in a personal and effective manner.

(c) Since Christ does not rule visibly, we still have the responsibility
of self-defense.

(d) But nonetheless the command to love our enemies is valid in a very
Christian way:

· Because you have experienced the very best in your life through your
relationship with God, you are motivated to bring that to every human
being.

· You realize that your enemy is a slave of Satan, and is as redeemable
as any other human being. He has as much potential as anyone thanks to
grace.

· The apostle Paul is the classic example of a persecutor turned to a
man of God. Acts 7:54-8:3 records the death of Stephen at the command of
Saul: “(54) Now when they heard this [the speech of Stephen] they were
cut to the quick, and they began gnashing their teeth at him. (55) But
being full of the Holy Spirit, he gazed intently into heaven and saw the
glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God; (56) and he
said, ‘Behold, I see the heavens opened up and the Son of Man standing
at the right hand of God.’ (57) But they cried out with a loud voice,
and covered their ears and rushed at him with one impulse. (58) When
they had driven him out of the city, they began stoning him; and the
witnesses laid aside their robes at the feet of a young man named Saul.
(59) They went on stoning Stephen as he called on the Lord and said,
‘Lord, do not hold this sin against them!’ Having said this, he fell
asleep. (8:1) Saul was in hearty agreement with putting him to death.
And on that day a great persecution began against the church in
Jerusalem, and they were all scattered throughout the regions of Judea
and Samaria, except the apostles. (2) Some devout men buried Stephen,
and made loud lamentation over him. (3) But Saul began ravaging the
church, entering house after house, and dragging off men and women, he
would put them in prison.”

· And yet Paul went on to be the great apostle.

· This is also the great example of the principle of persecution as
divine guidance. If persecutors make so much trouble for you that you
must move on, then God has someone somewhere else that is positive to
the gospel.

(5) The end limit for the persecution is the coming of the Son of Man.
The term ‘Son of Man’ reveals the following:

(a) That Christ is indeed the Messiah.

(b) And that the Messiah is the God-man in hypostatic union.

(c) And that Christ is the Son of Man from Daniel 7:13-14.

(d) That Christ has authority during the incarnation.

(e) That the Messiah is the atoning Messiah.

(f) That the Messiah will have the authority to judge in the coming
kingdom.

(6) Whenever Christ employed this term, every one got excited, because
the Daniel seven passage was exceptionally popular at the time.

Preparation for persecution. “A disciple is not above his teacher, nor
is a slave above his master. It is enough for the disciple that he
become like his teacher and the slave like his master. If they have
called the ruler of the house Beelzebub, how much worse they will call
the household members!”

(1) Christ reverses this principle of rank and humility to warn of the
greater severity of persecution for His followers.

(2) First comes the two general principles of rank. The realm of the
teacher and the realm of the master. Christ recognizes the reality of
rank and authority; He recognizes the axiomatic nature of the
relationship between people of varying ranks.

(3) Second is the principle of imitation: the disciple is to become like
his teacher and the slave like his master. It is important to recognize
that this is the objective for us as disciples of Christ.

(4) We are to imitate our Teacher and Master, Jesus Christ with regard
to the way that He lived His life. We are to imitate His complete
humility and dependence on God, and His perfect character in the
discharge of all of His responsibilities.

(5) But then comes a principle that returns to the realm of persecution.
If they revile the master, then how much more will they revile the
slaves?

(6) The slave or the disciple of Beelzebub is a fool for following the
devil. In a sense he is worse than Beelzebub, because he is of lower
rank and privilege.

(7) Christ is telling His disciples that they can expect worse
persecution than even what He has endured!

Words of encouragement and assurance of vindication.

The assurance of eternal vindication. “Therefore do not fear them; for
there is nothing having been concealed that will not be revealed and
hidden which will not be made known.”

(1) This exhortation gives the eternal rationale toward the persecution.

(2) There is the threat of death from persecution. Though they may kill
the body, the soul remains forever, and God has all of eternity to
compensate the martyr.

(3) The aorist subjunctive mood with the negative particle ME makes a
very strong negative. Christ is being very intense here with this
command.

(4) The perfect passive participle KEKLUMMENON describes the supreme
efforts of man to hide his inglorious deeds.

(a) Man may persecute and kill and attempt to hide what he has done.

(b) But God will reveal it. The future passive indicative verb
APOKALUPHTHESETAI makes this certain.

(c) The declarative indicative mood shows a certain reality to what will
occur in the future with regard to the acts of man.

(d) And the passive voice designates that the revelation will come from
a source outside the perpetrators. God will be the revealer - He will
say, “Let there be light!” and there will be light.

(5) Christ employs a parallelism to confirm and emphasize what He has
spoken. The second half of the parallel has two changes:

(a) It employs the adjective KRUPTON in place of the participle
KEKLUMMENON.

(b) It substitutes APOKALUPHTHESETAI with its synonym GNOSTHESETAI.

(c) These together are translated ‘there is nothing hidden which will
not be made known.

(6) You may have complete confidence that all the hidden deeds of men
will be revealed and made known.

(7) See the doctrine of the judgment seat of Christ.

The encouragement toward forthrightness. “What I say to you in the dark
you say in the light, and what you hear [whispered] in the ear, you
preach upon the housetops.”

(1) As a result of their confidence in eternal vindication, the
disciples may be confident with regard to what they say in this life.

(2) The metaphor of light and darkness is here employed in an unusual
fashion - not as good and evil, but rather as private and public.

(3) Christ’s training of His disciples is by necessity private. For
their protection and as a matter of efficiency.

(4) This lesson concerning the eternal advantage seems to apply in
countless realms. The lesson is that the eternal advantage should give
you a sense of self-esteem about who you are in Christ.

(a) It applies in all realms of undeserved suffering, including
persecution.

(b) It applies in the realm of sacrifice for the sake of the study of
the word.

(c) It applies in the realm of doing the right thing regardless of the
sacrifice, the true integrity of application.

(5) Preaching from the housetops was a method for reaching as many
people as possible with one speech. This was before the era of the
public address system and the cassette tape.

The distinctions regarding temporal and eternal loss. “And do not fear
from the ones who kill the body, but who does not have the power to kill
the soul; but fear rather the one who has power to kill both the soul
and the body in Gehenna. Aren’t two sparrows sold for a cent? Yet one of
them does not fall upon the ground apart from your Father. And indeed
every hair of your head is numbered. Therefore do not fear; you
yourselves are much different from sparrows.”

(1) Again Christ broaches the subject of fear; especially fear of death.

(2) Because no human being present and alive on this planet is able to
give a report concerning the nature of life after death, the matter
remains a great mystery.

(3) The mysterious nature of death makes it a matter of fear for many.
Ignorance breeds fear and superstition, and there is no greater matter
for fear and superstition than death.

(4) But God’s word fills this void of ignorance, so that we need not
fear. And Christ here gives them the word of God.

(5) Gehenna was the highest court of all, and that is the court of the
Gehenna of the Fire.

(a) The locality of Gehenna was in Jerusalem, and Jeremiah 19:5-6
identifies this place as the final place for the administration of the
fifth cycle of discipline on the nation, “They have built the high
places of Baal to burn their sons in the fire as offerings to Baal -
something I did not command or mention, nor did it enter my mind. So
beware, the days are coming, declares the Lord, when the people will no
longer call this place Topheth or the Valley of Ben Hinnom, but the
Valley of Slaughter.”

(b) It was the place of child sacrifice, and the fire is the
identification with the burning fires of sacrifice to Baal.

(c) It would become the place where the Jews were slaughtered for their
sins by the final attack of the Babylonian armies.

(d) Therefore the Jeremiah passage represents the administration of the
fifth cycle of discipline on Israel.

(e) But here Christ employs Gehenna in a figurative sense to indicate
something even worse - the final judgment of the unbeliever, the Lake of
Fire.

(6) There are two judges in view, two realms of power.

(a) The human judge, with his realm of power over the physical;

(b) The judge of the human race, who is Jesus Christ, with His complete
realm of power over the physical and the spiritual.

(7) Often, these judges are at odds with one another; they have
differing objectives and differing motives in life.

(8) When we find ourselves the object of both classes of authority, and
they differ in their desires for us, our duty is clear.

(9) The a fortiori argument of the sparrow compares men and sparrows. If
God cares for the sparrow, then how much more for men, who are greater
than sparrows? There is no sparrow who falls to the ground apart from
the Father.

(a) Even the death of the least of God’s creatures requires His consent.

(b) You will therefore not die without God’s consent.

(c) If God gives His consent to your death, then how might you prevent
it?

(d) This should never prevent you from fighting for your own life
according to principles of good conscience, but when God gives His
decree concerning your right time, then that is surely it.

(10) God has the hairs on your head numbered; surely if He has this
knowledge, He is in direct control of what happens to you.

(11) In any circumstance of persecution, you must have a focus on the
divine ability to protect you; you must have an understanding of just
how great His perceptive and protective powers are.

(12) This faith will remove the fear and allow you to do your duty unto
Him.

(a) Faith removes fear; love removes fear.

(b) Faith and love are not far removed from one another. Love is
dependent on faith, and love guarantees the purity of the faith.

The reassurance of eternal vindication. “Therefore everyone who
confesses in me before men, I will confess also in them before My Father
Who is in heaven; And whoever denies Me before men, I will also deny him
before My Father Who is in heaven.”

(1) This again returns to the judgment of Christ, where Jesus Christ
will do one of two things:

(a) Confess you before the Father;

(b) or deny you before the Father.

(2) To be confessed to the Father by Christ is confirmation that He will
personally presented you to God the Father at a heavenly honors
ceremony.

(a) Revelation 3:5. “…and I will confess his name before My Father, and
before His angels.”

(b) Colossians 3:4, “When Christ, who is our life, is revealed, then you
will also be revealed with Him in glory.”

The divisive nature of the Kingdom of God. “Do not think that I came to
cast peace upon the earth; I did not come to cast peace but a sword. For
I came to set a man against his father, and daughter against her mother,
and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law, and a man’s enemies are
his household-members.”

Now here is a change - Christ talks tough to His disciples so that they
will understand again the nature of the enemy arrayed against them.

Christ indicates that He came to earth to make war among men. And indeed
this is true; even when you take into account the nature of the first
advent and the cross of peace.

This does not change the nature of 2 Peter 3:9, “God is not willing that
any should perish…” He does indeed want everyone to become humble before
Him.

Christ came in order to win our salvation; our reconciliation and peace
before God. But the cross was also an act of war.

Now the sword which Christ mentions does not represent physical violence
and warfare. Rather, there is a representation of spiritual warfare.

Spiritual warfare divides families as long as the enemy exists within
that family. Spiritual distinctions divide families at least until all
are with Christ.

This does not abrogate the responsibility of virtue love toward all
members of the human race, including your family.

Perhaps this statement can be summarize by the statements of James
4:6-10, “(6) But He gives a greater grace. Therefore it says, ‘God is
opposed to the proud, but gives grace to the humble.’ (7) Submit
therefore to God. Resist the devil and he will flee. (8) and He will
draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners; and purify your
hearts, you double-minded. (9) Be miserable and mourn and weep; let your
laughter be turned into mourning and your joy to gloom. (10) Humble
yourselves in the presence of the Lord and He will exalt you.”

Christ did indeed come to make war against the arrogant.

(1) During the first advent, the nature of that war was entirely
spiritual. The ultimate operation of that war was at the cross.

(2) The cross is a great act of war against the arrogant. Ultimately, it
is destructive of their anti-grace ideas, because it is all grace.

(3) At the second advent, the warfare will be physically violent, swift,
and decisive. Jesus Christ is the greatest warrior of all men; He will
win the greatest victory of all time, and leave millions of the enemy
dead on the battlefield of Armageddon.

And you must realize that two realms are at war: the arrogant and the
humble. These may well be within your family.

With Jesus Christ, you have a new and greater and more permanent family.
It is the family of God. The family of God is greatly superior to any
relationship that is based solely on the things of this world.

This does not preach a total separation from your family; only a
separation from their worldly ways. You cannot take part in that!

You must also make the realization that there is a possibility of
eternal separation from the unbeliever elements of your family; your
greater allegiance must go to God, since you will not be separated from
Him in eternity.

Here are the main factors that separate you from the unbeliever elements
of your family.

(1) Your belief system, which is in a loving God and a loving savior in
Jesus Christ.

(2) Your modus operandi, which is grace.

(3) Your motivation in life, which is love for God.

(4) Your destiny, which is blessing for time and eternity.

You must embrace every virtue from your family, and separate from their
worldliness.

The results of the priorities according to the divisions. “The one who
love his father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me, and the one
who loves a son or daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me; and who
does not take his cross and follow after Me, he is not worthy of Me. The
one who find his soul destroys it, and the one who destroys his soul in
my behalf finds it.”

Christ demands love. Not from a lack of self-esteem on His part - not
because He feels threatened or is neurotic in some way.

Christ chooses the family because it is most often the closest
relationship that people have.

It is curious and significant that He does not choose the husband-wife
relationship. The two are one flesh by the decree of God, so Christ
avoids contradicting the will of God.

He demands love because love for Him is truly beneficial, and pays
dividends for both time and eternity.

This is a matter of priorities; Christ does not prevent us from loving
our families - He only warns us concerning our priorities.

If we love our families to the point where we cause neglect in our
relationship with God, we have made a grave mistake that will reach into
eternity.

You cannot take your family with you. They may decide on their own to
join you, but you have no power to bring them into eternity.

The power of God to compensate you in eternity for the loss of your
family in time is your source of comfort.

It is your love for Christ that makes you worthy of Him. If He is your
top priority in life, you will be worthy of Him, and receive His
approval at the judgment seat of Christ.

Then comes something completely out of the ordinary; Christ tells His
disciples that they must take up their cross and follow after Him.
Taking up the cross is equated with worthiness.

(1) But Christ has not died on the cross yet. You would think that this
sounds much more like a post-resurrection saying than it does one that
is before His death on the cross.

(2) How did Christ know? The cross was a common method of capital
punishment, and because of its tortures, it was universally feared.

(3) And He says, ‘Follow after Me.’ This indicates that He has already
taken up His own cross, and is walking with it.

(4) Taking up a cross is a reference to the practice of the day, which
was to force the convicted criminal to carry his cross from the place of
judgment to the place of execution.

(5) Carrying the cross was a symbol of public ridicule.

(6) But here Christ wants His disciples to carry their crosses with
esprit de corps.

(7) By this time, Christ had surmised that He was going to die on cross.
He understood the significance of the 22nd Psalm, and had identified
that it applied to Him. He had seen other men die on crosses, and with a
chill of recognition seen the exact match between the prophecy and the
reality.

(8) This made His prayers in Gethsemane all the more real. He knew of
the physical ordeal, and more than that, of the spiritual ordeal that
was ahead.




The Romans employed the following procedures in crucifixion.

(1) Flogging as the precedent to the actual crucifixion, and it was
their custom to flog the back the of victim to a point where the blood
flowed freely. This, though it seemed cruel, actually hastened the death
of the crucified, and usually shortened their torture by many hours.

(2) The victim was then required to carry his cross-beam (the upright
beam was always planted in the ground beforehand) to the place of
execution. This symbolized his culpability before the public - that he
was fully to blame for the torture and death to come.

(3) The executioners would then force the victim to the ground, and
fasten him to the cross-beam - commonly by use of ropes, and less often
by means of nails through the wrist joint. At this point the man and his
cross beam were lifted to the upright.

(4) At this point the victim was often offered a mixture of wine and
narcotic, in order to deaden his senses through the ordeal. It is
important to note that Christ refused this offer.

(5) The cross beam was then secured to the upright, often by means of
pre-positioned blocks of wood, and the victim’s feet were bound or
nailed together. Archaeological evidence indicates that it was not
always the practice to secure the feet to the upright. They were nailed
together, yes, but not also to the upright of the cross.

(6) Not often mentioned in Christian circles, but appearing often in the
historical accounts of crucifixion is the use of a SEDICULA. This was a
peg or block of wood positioned mid-way on the upright with the purpose
of a support for the buttocks of the victim. This was especially
heinous, for it kept the victim alive for an inordinate amount of time.
The SEDICULA was mutually exclusive with the securing of the feet to the
upright. The SEDICULA was not mentioned in the death of Christ, and was
most likely not used in His case. It make be unlikely, because Christ
died quite swiftly for a victim of crucifixion. The record stay on a
cross was nine days - an altogether remarkable feat.

(7) The agony of the cross was due to several factors:

(a) The pressure on the hands or wrists and feet due to gravity. Without
the SEDICULA, the entire weight of the body was on the fastenings of the
wrists. If this was a nail type of fastening, the agony was due to the
tearing of the flesh. If a rope fastening, then the agony was due to the
loss of circulation. In both the arms and legs, there was the
commonality of extreme stress on the joints, and even dislocation.

(b) The inability to draw a good breath. With the arms spread out and
the back hard against the upright, there is a difficulty in moving the
chest muscles which work together to draw breath. If the feet were
fastened to the upright, then the agony of tearing flesh would have to
be endured in order more effective breathe. With all of the trauma,
heavy breathing would be the norm. With crucifixion, heavy breathing is
quite difficult. When the executioners broke the legs of the victim, it
was to speed the death by suffocation.

(c) Exposure. Victims were most often stripped of all clothing before
they were crucified. In cooler climates or seasons, victims could easily
expire due to hypothermia. Also, victims who survived for a few days
would finally succumb to thirst.

(d) Public shame. Hanging naked on a cross in a public place, unable to
relieve yourself in private, all of these would induce much mockery.

(e) Illness and disease. The longer the victim lasted, the more
susceptible he was to illness and disease. Tetanus and lockjaw must have
been common; infected wounds due to the presence of flies and other
insects must have been common as well.

(f) Extreme fatigue. Remaining in one position for 24 hours a day would
render the muscles completely useless.

Taking up your cross willingly was to admit your guilt of your own
volition. This of course was never done.

And yet this is what Christ tells His disciples to do. What a great
thunderbolt this was from Christ.

Association with Christ means association with the cross, and Christ
knew it long before He would take up his own cross.

The cross is a legitimate reason for boasting in the Christian life,
Galatians 6:14, “But may it never be that I would boast, except in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been
crucified to me, and I to the world.”

(1) The cross causes our death to the world, and the world’s death to
us.

(2) We now live a new life, a life that is unto God.

kp The cross stands as a symbol of our experiential victory over sin:

(1) Romans 6:3-7, “(3) Or do you not know that all of us who have been
baptized into Christ Jesus have been baptized into His death? (4)
Therefore we have been buried with Him through baptism into death, so
that as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father,
so we too might walk in newness of life. (5) For if we have become
united with Him in the likeness of His death, certainly we shall also be
in the likeness of His resurrection, (6) knowing this, that our old self
was crucified with Him, in order that our body of sin might be done away
with, so that we would no longer be slaves to sin; (7) for he who has
died is freed from sin.”

(2) 2 Corinthians 13:4, “For indeed He was crucified because of
weakness, yet He lives because of the power of God. For we also are weak
in Him, yet we will live with Him because of the power of God directed
toward you.”

(3) Galatians 2:20, “I have been crucified with Christ; and it is no
longer I who live, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live
in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of god, who lived me and gave
Himself up for me.”

(4) Galatians 5:24, “Now those who are of Christ Jesus have crucified
the flesh with its passions and desires.”

The cross stands as the supreme symbol of Christ-like character:

(1) Philippians 2:5-8, “(5) Have this attitude in yourselves which was
also in Christ Jesus, (6) who, although He existed in the form of God,
did not regard equality with God a thing to be grasped, (7) but emptied
Himself, taking the form of a bond-servant, and being made in the
likeness of men. (8) Being found in appearance as a man, He humbled
Himself by becoming obedient to the point of death, even death on a
cross.”

(2) Hebrews 12:1-3, “(1) Therefore, since we have so great a cloud of
witnesses surrounding us, let us also lay aside every encumbrance and
the sin which so easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the
race that is set before us, (2) fixing our eyes on Jesus, the author and
perfect of faith, who for the joy set before Him endured the cross,
despising the shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of
God. (3) For consider Him who has endured such hostility by sinners
against Himself, so that you will not grow weary and lose heart.”

So when you take up your cross and follow Jesus Christ, it is a symbol
of your humility toward God’s plan for your life, and your separation
from the world by means of a symbolic death

The reward of the faithful. “The one who receives you receives Me, and
the one who receives Me receives the one who sent Me. The one who
receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive the profit of a
prophet, and the one who receives a righteous man in the name of a
righteous man will receive the reward of a righteous man. And whoever in
the name of a disciple gives to one of these little ones even a cup of
cold water, truly I say to you, he will certainly not lose his reward!”

There is a connection between Christ and His disciples: they are His
substitutionary representatives to the all the people that they minister
to. They are His ambassadors.

Furthermore, there is a connection between God and Christ; Christ is the
ambassador for God, and the ultimate ambassador, He is God’s Son.

There is reward for those who receive the disciples. Christ employs two
proverbs or common truths in order to communicate this principle of
reward.

(1) The profit of the prophet goes to those who receive the prophets in
the name of the prophet.

(a) This may seem a little confusing. Therefore, a principle - not all
those who receive the prophet receive them fully.

(b) Prophets are celebrities, and there is much to gain by receiving
them into your home - approbation, social standing, even an increase in
commerce.

(c) But receiving a prophet in his own name means receiving his message
in your own heart - really believing and implementing what he has to
say.

(d) It is only this person who receives the reward of the prophet - who
shares in the bounty that comes from God through the prophet.

(2) The reward of the righteous man goes to those who receive the
righteous man in the name of the righteous man.

(a) Again there is advantage to receiving a righteous man. Advantage
that goes beyond the spiritual realm to the earthly.

(b) On account of that, only the one who receives the righteous man and
his message receives the reward of the righteous man.

(3) With regard to Christ, you must be more than just a Christian by
name. If you apply the Christian name to yourself for personal
advantage, you will certainly not receive the heavenly reward of Christ.

(a) Indeed you may well miss out on salvation, if you do not accept the
essence of the salvation offer;

(b) You may well miss out on eternal reward above and beyond salvation,
if you do not accept the essence of the plan of God.

(c) Calling yourself a Christian because your shadow once darkened the
halls of a church does not make you a Christian. Calling yourself a
Christian because your parents baptized you a Christian as an infant
does not make you a Christian.

(d) You are not a Christian because you call yourself one; indeed you
are only a Christian if you have trusted in Christ’s work for your
eternal salvation.

(e) And to be a mature Christian, you must have a Christ-like character
that has been tested by the fire of undeserved suffering.

(4) The name of the prophet and the name of the righteous man has to do
with the core of their being and their mission; the name was tantamount
to essence.

The final statement is interesting: “And whoever in the name of a
disciple gives to one of these little ones even a cup of cold water,
truly I say to you, he will certainly not lose his reward!”

(1) It seems the focus is Christian charity toward children. But perhaps
it is best to focus on the word Christian.

(2) For this simple act of charity must be done in the name of a
disciple in order to produce the intended effect.

(3) There must be proper Christian motivation for every act of charity:
1 Corinthians 13:1-3, “(1) If I speak with the tongues of men and of
angels, but do not have love, I have become a noisy gong or a clanging
cymbal. (2) If I have the gift of prophecy, and know all mysteries and
all knowledge; and if I have all faith so as to remove mountains, but do
not have love, I am nothing. (3) And if I give all my possessions to
feed the poor, and if I surrender my body to be burned, but do not have
love, it profits me nothing.”

(4) Notice that charity does not gain a reward, it only prevents you
from losing it!

(a) This is a really important distinction!

(b) The mature Christian is the one who advances in God’s plan and
produces Christ-like character; furthermore, he is the one who endures
undeserved suffering and maintains his love for God.

(c) Charity is the application of the doctrine of grace to the truly
helpless. It is one facet of divine character and the attitude of the
spiritually mature.

(d) A charitable attitude alone does not define you as a mature
believer.

(e) Eternal reward above and beyond salvation goes to those who have
mature Christ-like character in all facets.

(f) But, you may lose your reward if you begin to slip in one category,
such as charity. Therefore the distinction of loss of reward, and the
proper placement of motivation with reference to charity.

III. The prepared ambassador for Christ:

Understands the issue of grace orientation.

Understands the need to leave behind and completely forget those who are
negative.

Keeps moving, not spending undue time on the negative.

Understands the nature of negative volition.

It may be expressed in disinterest.

It may be expressed in antagonism.

Murderous antagonism.

Slanderous antagonism.

Proselytizing antagonism.

Is confident that the Spirit will guide his words, and that spiritual
information is all the eloquence that he needs.

There is danger of persecution from even the closest of friends and
family; be prepared for the need to choose between family and Christ as
a matter of priorities.

Be prepared for greater persecution than even what Christ experienced.

Understands the eternal advantage, and how it allays the fears related
to ambassadorship.

Herod and John the Baptist
--------------------------

Matthew 14:1-2

“(1) During that time Herod the Tetrarch heard the news of Jesus, (2)
and said to his servants, ‘This is John the Baptist; He was raised from
the dead and for this reason the miracles are working in him.’”

Mark 6:14-16

And king Herod heard [the news of Jesus], for His name became
perspicuous, and they were saying, ‘John the Baptist is risen from death
and ‘for this reason the miracles are working in Him.’ (15) But others
were saying, He is Elijah;’ and others were saying ‘He is a prophet like
one of the [old-time] prophets. (16) But Herod, after hearing [these
things] was saying, ‘The one whom I beheaded, John, he is risen.’”

Luke 9:7-9:

“(7) Now Herod the Tetrarch heard all the happenings and he was going
through difficulty because the things said by some that John was raised
from the dead, (8) and by some that Elijah had appeared, and others that
one of the prophets of old had risen again. (9) And Herod said, ‘I
personally beheaded John; but who is this man concerning whom I am
hearing such things?’ And he kept on seeking to see Him.”

Exposition.

An identification and biography of Herod the Tetrarch.

This is the son of Herod the Great, Herod Antipas. He was the Tetrarch
over Galilee and Perea, where the majority of the events of Christ’s
life took place.

Herod the Great had ten wives and seven sons. Four of those seven would
play a role in the New Testament. All of the wives wanted their sons to
be Herod’s successor. This was a complication.

His first son Antipater was through his first wife Doris.

Herod repudiated her and Antipater when he married Mariamne I, the
granddaughter of the famous Hyrcanus. This was in 37 BC Alexander and
Aristobulus were born by her.

In 24 BC Herod married Mariamne II, by whom he had Herod Philip.

Just a year later, he married his fourth wife, Malthace, a Samaritan by
whom he had Archelaus and Antipas.

And another two years after that, he married wife \#5, Cleopatra of
Jerusalem, by whom he had Philip the Tetrarch.

The other five wives bore him no sons, and only three are mentioned by
name, Pallas, Phaedra, and Elpis. He also had daughters.

Herod’s two favorite sons were those by Mariamne I, Alexander and
Aristobulus.

Make note: Aristobulus married his cousin, Bernice.

Make note: This union produced a daughter, Herodias.

Herod had a sister, Salome, who hated these two favorite sons, even
though her daughter Bernice was married to Aristobulus.

(1) She had designs for her own son, a certain Antipater, to ascend to
the throne of Herod. He is not to be confused with Antipater, Herod’s
first son by Doris.

(2) Salome maligned Mariamne I before Herod, and Herod believed her and
had Mariamne I killed.

(3) The two sons were naturally indignant, and threatened to bring
charges before Caesar that would cause him to lose his throne.

(4) And as a consequence Herod changed his will so that Antipater by
Doris was named the sole heir to the throne. He then sent Antipater to
the emperor to have the will ratified.

(5) Realizing that being gone from Herod’s presence was a dangerous
thing, Antipater wrote slanderous letter against Alexander and
Aristobulus from Rome.

(6) As a result of this slander, Herod had these two tried before Caesar
Augustus in 12 BC Amazingly, the court system worked, and they were
found not guilty on all counts, and more than that, they were reconciled
to their father, and to Antipater as well.

(7) Herod changed his will to name all three sons equally.

(8) But Salome, Herod’s sister, was not finished yet. Together with
brother Pheroras and son Antipater, the slander began again against the
two sons of Mariamne I.

(a) This time they obtained the testimony of one friend of Alexander’s,
and on the basis of a single eyewitness they convinced Herod that the
two were plotting Herod’s death and planning to lay claim to the throne
before Rome.

(b) Alexander was cast into prison, but thanks to Alexander’s
father-in-law, he was set free and reconciled to Herod.

In the next round, Antipater convinced his friend Eurycles from Sparta
to play Alexander and Aristobulus against Herod. They fell for it, and
were caught in the plotting phase.

(1) Herod became so suspicious that he once again imprisoned the
brothers, and accused them of treason.

(2) Herod sent to Rome seeking the Emperor’s advice regarding his sons,
and Augustus gave Herod full authority to deal with his sons as he
wished, but advised to him to conduct a Roman trial outside of his own
territory. He feared that without a change of venue there would be a
rebellion.

(3) The trial was conducted in Berytus (Beirut), and a guilty verdict
was passed. The two sons Alexander and Aristobulus were executed by
strangulation in 7 BC

(4) Herod’s fourth will now named Antipater by Doris his sole successor.

But Antipater was an impatient man…

(1) He held secret conferences with Herod’s brother Pheroras. They
intended to kill the old man.

(2) Salome, Herod’s sister, got wind of these meetings and spilled the
beans to Herod.

(3) Thus Herod’s relationship with his sole named heir became somewhat
strained.

(4) Antipater then arranged to have emperor Augustus summon him to Rome,
with the excuse that the new will needed ratification. He was then
conveniently out of town.

(5) Pheroras, Herod’s brother and Antipater’s uncle died. Herod
conducted an investigation, and discovered that not only did Pheroras
die of poison, but also that same poison had been intended for him.

(6) Herod recalled Antipater under false pretenses, and he thus returned
without suspicion. He was thrown into prison, tried the next day and
found guilty. It took some time, however to gain permission to execute
Antipater, but eventually it was done.

(7) And so Herod had another will drawn up. Since his two oldest living
sons had been turned against him by Antipater, that is, Herod Philip by
Mariamne II and Archelaus by Malthace, he excluded them from will \#6.
Everything now went to Antipas by Malthace.

Herod was by now old and feeble and full of disease. Nothing could ease
his discomfort, soul and body.

It was around this time that Christ was born, and everyone was talking
about the new-born true king of the Jews. Herod’s paranoia was at an
all-time high, and so he was motivated to kill all those children in
Bethlehem.

And at the same time, two rabbis incited the people to tear down the
Roman eagle from the temple gate. The offenders were seized and burned
alive.

And just then he made his final will, naming Archelaus of Malthace as
king, Antipas of Malthace as Tetrarch of Galilee and Perea, and their
half-brother Philip of Cleopatra of Jerusalem as the Tetrarch of
Gaulanitis, Trachonitis, Batanea, and Paneas.

But of course the last will was disputed, because it was made just five
days before Herod’s death, and it needed the emperor’s ratification.

Archelaus was the de facto ruler during this time. During the next
Passover, a crowd gathered before Archelaus and began to demand
retribution for the deaths of those killed by his father during the
eagle incident.

The crowd turned ugly when Archelaus refused this retribution, and so he
ordered the troops in. Three thousand people were killed. Not a good
start.

Immediately after this, Archelaus and Antipas went to Rome together,
each to claim before the emperor the will which benefited himself.
Archelaus said the last will always counts, while Antipas said the last
will was not made by a mentally well Herod. It must have been an
interesting boat ride. Philip was left behind to manage matters.

While these were in Rome, another riot broke out during Pentecost, and
this went on for about two months and many more deaths.

The Jews therefore sent a delegation to Rome, pleading for their lives
and their autonomy.

Philip got nervous about everyone being in Rome, so he went too.

Augustus, thoroughly tired by the whole mess by now, issued a
compromise.

(1) Archelaus was made ruler over Idumea, Judea, and Samaria with the
special title of Ethnarch. He was promised kingship if he ruled well.

(2) Antipas was made tetrarch over Galilee and Perea.

(3) And Philip was given Gaulanitis, Trachonitis, Batanea, and Paneas as
tetrarch. (See map)

Archelaus reign as ethnarch was characterized by brutality and tyranny,
even though like his father he tried to bribe the people by building
things.

In AD 6 the Jews and Samaritans joined together in a delegation to Rome,
where they complained to the emperor. Antipas and Philip the Tetrarch
also went because they felt Archelaus had neglected their territories.

Archelaus was then deposed and exiled to the south of France.

Archelaus territory then became an imperial province under direct Roman
rule.

Antipas was the ruler over Galilee, the central area of most of Christ’s
ministry.

He first undertook a rebuilding program to fix the destruction of the
revolt of 4 BC Sepphoris was the largest city of Galilee. It was
rebuilt, and since it was just 4 miles from Nazareth it is likely that
Joseph, a carpenter, worked on the project.

Tiberias was a new city founded under his building program. But while
they were building, the builders struck on the site of an old cemetery,
and thus the whole area became unclean to the Jews. He therefore enticed
people there by offering free homes and lands and tax exemption for the
first few years.

Antipas married the daughter of the Nabatean king Aretas IV, an Arab.
This added to Antipas’ realm, and to Caesar Augustus’ tax base.

In AD 28 or 29, Antipas decided to go to Rome, and on the way to visit
his half-brother Herod Philip, who lived down on the seacoast.

Now Herod Philip had married his brother Aristobulus’ daughter, whose
name was Herodias. You remember her. Well… Herodias was a very beautiful
woman, and Antipas fell in love with her; his own niece and
sister-in-law.

Now Herodias was a typical scheming member of the Herod family, and she
secretly agreed to divorce Herod Philip and marry Antipas, provided that
he divorce the daughter of Aretas IV.

Somehow, Antipas’ first wife discovered the plan, and fled to her
father. Aretas took the whole deal as an insult, and a few years later
attacked and defeated Antipas in a battle.

But John the Baptist took offence at this incestual marriage, and let
off steam about it. This is why he was thrown into prison - Matthew
14:3.

Later Herodias would connive to have John killed as retribution for
stirring up the people against her behavior - Matthew 14:1-12.

Antipas was greatly fascinated with the ministry of Christ, and longed
to see His miracles.

(1) And when Pilate had custody of Christ and understood our Lord to be
a citizen of Galilee, he sent him to Antipas, for it was under his
jurisdiction. Herod Antipas was there for the feast of the Passover.

(2) Luke 23:8-12 records what happened. “(8) Now Herod was very glad
when he saw Jesus; for he had wanted to see Him for a long time, because
he had been hearing about Him and was hoping to see some sign performed
by Him. (9) And he questioned Him at some length; but He answered him
nothing. (10) And the chief priests and the scribes were standing there,
accusing Him vehemently. (11) And Herod with his soldiers, after
treating Him with contempt and mocking Him, dressed Him in a gorgeous
robe and sent Him back to Pilate. (12) Now Herod and Pilate became
friends with one another that very day; for before they had been enemies
with each other.”

(3) Antipas identified himself with the Jews by treating their enemy as
his enemy also. He may also have been outraged that Christ gave him no
show.

A review of the life of John the Baptist.

His ministry.

John the Baptist’s ministry was the fulfillment of prophecy; it
signified and pointed to the arrival of the Messiah.

John the Baptist had a ministry from God to prepare Israel for the
millennial kingdom and its king.

The ministry of John the Baptist had nothing to do whatsoever with the
church. In essence it is in its own watertight compartment apart from
the church. It drew its precedence from the dispensation of Israel.

John drew his sense of destiny from an Old Testament prophecy concerning
his ministry. Isa 40; Mal 3:1. “Prepare the way for the Lord.”

Since John and Jesus were cousins, it is likely that they knew one
another as children and young men. John knew exactly who the Messiah
was, and probably long before he ever preached his message.

John began his ministry of repentance and baptism in the Spring of 26 AD

You must understand that John was the greatest prophet of the age of
Israel. His person and message were greater even than Isaiah or Jeremiah
or any other. Our Lord testified to this in Matthew 11:11.

John had a great following; he was wildly popular among the people of
Israel and even among some Romans.

His mission was to point the way to one even greater. From the seeming
greatest to the even greater.

Long after John was gone, people still gravitated towards his ministry,
even to the exclusion of Christ. In some ways, people still do, whenever
they are legalistic and place great value on outward acts of piety.

His downfall, John 3:26-31.

Verse 26: “And they came to John and said to Him, ‘Rabbi, He who was
with you beyond the Jordan, about whom you yourself have testified,
behold, He is baptizing and all are coming to Him.’”

(1) These guys are out of fellowship about losing their ministry to
Christ and His disciples.

(2) Their concentration and focus is entirely on John, in the first
part. ‘He who was with you…’ ‘About whom you have testified…’

(3) But then they notice that this ministry is tapering off and they do
not like it. “He is baptizing [sneering tone], and all are coming to
Him.”

(4) But something else. Christ has now begun His own ministry. Why is
John still at work? Why has John not ceased now that Christ has begun?
Perhaps this is John’s one flaw. He did not know when to hang it up.

Verse 27: “John answered and said, ‘No man can receive a single thing
unless it has been given to him from heaven.’”

(1) This is a hard line grace answer. The real man in question is Jesus
Christ.

(2) It reveals the unasked question of the disciple-Jew alliance: Why
Christ and not John?

(3) John tells them: All are going to Christ because it comes from
heaven.

Verse 28: “You yourselves witnessed me saying, ‘I myself am not the
Christ, but that I have been sent ahead of Him.’”

(1) Again, John draws attention to Christ, and his relationship to
Christ. Here he reprises his role as the way-paver, even for some of his
disciples.

(2) The conclusion is that John says the right things, but that he has
appearance of being self-centered. If John was doing the right thing at
this time, this would be a marvelous statement; but since he is not, we
may call it somewhat self-centered.

(3) John has applied his mission in this way: he sees himself as the one
who must prepare the way for every individual in Israel. That before
anyone goes to Christ, they must go through him.

(4) He sees a continuing role for himself in Christ’s kingdom. He is the
screener, the way paver, the man who prepares the hearts of all for
Christ, even as Christ is on the scene.

(5) Christ is there to be seen face to face; His ministry is in the
open. Why should Israel go through a human being to see Him?

Verse 29: “The who has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of
the bridegroom, the one who stands and hears him rejoices with joy
through the sound of bridegroom’s voice. Therefore this joy of mine has
been made full.”

(1) The bride at this point is Israel; the groom is Christ; the friend
is John.

(2) The friend is what we would call the best man. In the Jewish
wedding, the friend would stand next to the bridegroom and hear his
vows. At this he would rejoice, as any best man would.

(3) John says:

(a) That he does not have the prize at this wedding of all weddings:
Christ does. The bride is Israel.

(b) But that he still rejoices for Christ, and that the joy of hearing
Christ’s voice has been made full at this time.

(c) Again, though, there is hint of bitterness. John perhaps has
indulged in self-pity here. Oh, he is not the bridegroom, and he does
not get the bride, but at least he vicariously experiences the
bridegroom’s joy. “Even though I do not get Christ’s joy, I am happy for
him. My limited joy has been made complete.”

(4) Why the negative assessment of John’s statement? Because of his
actions. If John had ceased his ministry at the beginning of Christ’s
ministry, then these statements could have been taken in the most
positive light possible. Now because of John’s action, they have the
appearance of tarnish and rust. There is a dark side to them.

(5) John may say this marvelous thing, but it seems as though he is
still in love with the bride, and dating her though she is walking down
the aisle.

Verse 30: “It is necessary for that one to increase, but for me to
diminish.”

(1) Note the two verbs that reflect the necessity.

(a) The first is AUXANO, to grow. This verb described the growth of
living things, of plants and trees, of children. It shows a gradual
growth over a period of time.

(b) The second is ELATTOO, to shrink. This too is a verb of gradual
change. It describes the action of shrinking over time, of growth in
reverse.

(2) What John has done here is nothing less than put a spin on the
events of the past few days. But let’s look again at the facts!

(a) In verse 23, people are coming out of nowhere to be baptized by
John.

(b) In verse 26, they are all going to Christ.

(3) This is not a gradual growth and diminishment! This is an all at
once radical change!

(4) But why does John put his spin on these events? It can only be
because he wants to hold on to the following and the ministry that he
thinks he has.

(5) John sees his accession as gradual; what has already happened was
immediate and absolute.

(6) John uses a rather impersonal mode of reference to Jesus Christ. It
is the far demonstrative pronoun, EKEINON.

(7) In fact, in this entire discourse, John uses the word Christ only
once, and never the word Jesus.

(a) In verse 27, John says, “a man cannot receive a single thing.” The
application is Jesus.

(b) In verse 28, John says, “I myself am not the Christ.” But the real
focus of the sentence is John, through his use of the intensive pronoun.

(c) In verse 29, John employs a short parable, where Christ is the
bridegroom, but Christ is never mentioned by name.

(d) In verse 30, John uses the far demonstrative.

(8) Jesus was John’s own cousin. They were family, and yet John the
Baptist uses only titles and roundabout ways to describe our Lord.

(9) John uses emphatic, intensive, and self-centered modes of expression
to describe himself.

(10) Apparently, all the popularity and approbation had gone to John’s
head. He would lose that same head about a year later.

What follows now is an injection of John the Apostle’s. He inserts his
own discourse, and in a way it concentrates on what the Baptist has just
said. In opposition to John’s self-centered words, the Apostle
concentrates very much on the person and character of Christ.

Verse 31: “The one who comes from above is above all; the one who is
from the earth is from the earth and speaks of the earth. The one who
comes from heaven is above all.”

(1) A. Now for John the Apostle’s editorial comment. He tells us in this
verse that what the Baptist has just said it cosmic propaganda, and
entirely wrong.

(2) First is Christ. Christ comes from above, and is above all. He is
above the selfishness and pettiness of the Baptist. He is above all
human flaws.

(3) Second is the Baptist. He is from the earth and he speaks the
worldly point of view. Make no mistake. John paints the Baptist here as
he is: worldly and trapped in the cosmic system. Spouting forth to his
last few followers the propaganda that he hopes will keep them.

(4) Third is Christ again, and you can see immediately John the
Apostle’s desire to keep his gospel centered on Christ, and above all in
its own right. John needed to get out the truth on the last days of the
Baptist’s ministry, but did so in such a way that was objective and did
not linger on the sad details of the demise of this great prophet of
Israel.

(5) Knowing what we now know now will make it easier to understand why
in a few more days John will be thrown into prison, and his enigmatic
message to Christ once there.

When John is in prison, he really loses his focus, and his faith.

Luke 7:18-35: “(18) And his disciples reported to John about all these
things. And summing some two of his disciples John (19) sent to the
Lord, saying, ‘Are you the coming one or do we expect another?’ (20) And
after they appeared beside Him the men said, ‘John the Baptist sent us
to you, saying, ‘Are you the coming one or do we expect another?’ (21)
In that hour He healed many from illness and disease and evil spirits
and to many blind He freely gave to see. (22) And after formulating an
answer, He said to them, ‘After you arrive proclaim to John what you saw
and heard; blind men see again, lame men walk, lepers are cleansed and
deaf men hear, dead men are raised, poor men are evangelized. (23) And
blessed is anyone who does not stumble over Me. (24) And after the
messengers of John left, He began to speak to the crowds about John,
‘What did you go out into the desert to witness? A reed stirred by the
wind? (25) Really, what did you go out to see? A man wearing white
clothes? Behold those in glorious clothing and possessing luxury are in
the palace. (26) But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes I say to
you, and more than a prophet. (27) He is the one about whom it has been
written, ‘Behold I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare
your way before you.’ (28) I say to you, among those born of women, no
one is greater. But the least in the kingdom of God is greater than him.

John the Baptist has lost his perspective from Jesus. This is because he
hears all these great things about Christ, and yet he does not see
Christ as the Messiah.

And why is that? How could you deny Christ as the Messiah when you hear
all of these things about him?

It had to do with personal circumstances. John was in prison, put there
by his enemy and the enemy of Israel. That in John’s mind Christ had
done nothing to free him (which was the law of volitional
responsibility), nor to free his people from the Herodian tyranny was
enough to deny Jesus as the Messiah.

This is the classic cosmic rationale.

(1) John was suffering because of his own stubborn efforts in clinging
too long to his ministry, and his shift of focus from the Pharisees to
the Herodians.

(2) But John refused to see that in his state of spiritual blindness,
and so he shifted the blame to Jesus.

(3) He concluded that Jesus could not be the Messiah, because He had not
freed him, when that was so obviously what any Messiah should do.

(4) Suddenly God was not God because John had not gotten his way. And
because of his spiritual malfunction, John had become like his worst
enemies, the Pharisees.

(5) John must indeed have been suffering from spiritual blindness.

Herod hears the news of Jesus. “During that time Herod the Tetrarch
heard the news of Jesus, for His name became perspicuous, and he was
going through difficulty because of the things said by some: and they
were saying, ‘John the Baptist is risen from death,’ and, ‘for this
reason the miracles are working in Him,’ and ‘He is Elijah,’ and still
others, ‘He is a prophet like one of the [old-time] prophets.’”

What makes Herod Antipas nervous is that he has recently ordered the
beheading of John the Baptist, and indeed this was carried out in his
presence.

How utterly out of touch is this man with the spiritual doings in his
kingdom!

The name of Jesus had become PHANERON, ‘perspicuous.’ The fame of Christ
had grown throughout the land, and it was only two years previous that
John the Baptist had much the same kind of fame.

Herod was going through a difficulty in his life, DIEIPOREI. The
original verb is APOREO, which means to be at a loss, uncertain, full of
doubt.

This is perhaps an understatement.

The uninformed were claiming that John the Baptist had risen from death,
or he is Elijah, or he is a prophet like one of the old-time prophets.

These speculations are somewhat old. Folks had been talking the same way
about Christ ever since His ministry had begun.

And you should certainly note that they are rationalizations on the true
nature and ministry of Christ.

People will go to great mental lengths in order to deny that Christ is
the Messiah, and the Son of God and Savior of the world.

For our own generation, there are many more explanations of Christ, and
all are shams that avoid the true issue of His life.

The issue of Christ’s life is the character of God.

(1) The conscience of God contains His norms and standards for thought,
word, and act. This is righteousness. When the righteousness of God is
expressed toward others, this is justice. The conscience of God
evaluates all of His perception and experience, inward and out, with
Himself and with others.

(2) The motivation of God is the complex of thought that moves Him to
action. This is the interaction of His conscience with His perfect
perception of the true needs of others. The true needs of others causes
God to intervene on their behalf.

(3) The analytical ability of God is expressed by the term grace. Grace
is not just what God does for us, but how He does it as well.

(a) God both perceives our problems and provides for their solution
perfectly.

(b) God is absolutely proficient at problem solving. His approach
concentrates on His thinking, His Merit, and His power. He recognizes
the value of human volition, and integrates what He knows will work with
the possibility and responsibility of human will.

(c) So God analyzes what He knows will work, and proposes it to the
human race.

(4) God’s mind is in a perfect state of organization. Order is the
perfect application of grace expressed in the plan of God.

(a) Let’s examine this portion of God’s character in a little more
detail.

(b) In warfare there is a desperate need for victory; therefore
strategists have over time developed certain immutable principles
related to the attainment of victory. These we may apply as though they
are from God, because God is the best of all at war.

· He understands the principle of objective.

- The objective constitutes the guide for the interpretation of orders,
for the formation of decisions, and for the employment of the means
available.

- God has a set objective for every human life. This is understood as
predestination. The objective is completed love for Him, love for Him in
any situation in life. This is spiritual maturity. Therefore, every part
of grace is aimed at this objective.

- This in turn fulfills His objective, which is vindication in the
angelic appeal trial.

· He understands the principle of offensive.

- Offensive action is the only means by which a decision is gained in
warfare. The offensive increases the effectiveness of the force that
adopts it because it raises morale, permits concentration of effort, and
allows freedom of action.

- Our application of this principle is to gain and perpetuate spiritual
momentum inside His plan.

- Spiritual momentum is defined as the demand of truth, the spiritual
necessity of moving forward. One days’ spiritual growth demands, makes
necessary the next.

- You take the offensive whenever you learn and apply the truth. This is
the means by which you attain the objective.

- Offensive means having right priorities and setting aside the
distractions of life.

· He understands the principle of mass.

- Mass defines combat power. The concept includes the numbers, the
weapons, the tactical skill, the fighting ability, the resolution, the
discipline, the morale, and the leadership of the fighting force.

- Successful employment of mass means putting maximum mass at the proper
time and place to achieve the objective.

- Mass for the Christian means the combination of divine power and human
concentration toward the application of truth during undeserved
suffering.

- Mass means that all of the appropriate elements of grace come together
at the point of attack to produce maximum love for God.

· He understands the principle of economy of force.

- The economy of force is the efficient means by which military mass is
deployed in a main effort. Men and means are directed in such a way that
there is no compromise to the main effort, and as little as possible
elsewhere.

- Economy for the Christian means focusing your life on the point of
attack, which is spiritual growth.

· He understands the principle of movement.

- This refers to the maneuver of combat arms and their support. This
means to bring military mass into close contact with the enemy to secure
a decisive result, and to put the mass where it can attack with maximum
advantage. This always has the idea of being in the right geographical
location for the achievement of the objective.

- The movement of the Christian focuses on the geographical will of God.
And the geographical will always has to do with the objective. You must
always place yourself geographically at the point where you will have
the maximum opportunity to fulfill God’s plan.

· He understands the principle of unity of command.

- Unity of command is more than cooperation (see principle \#10). It is
the responsibility of each command toward fulfillment of the objective
under a single commander.

- Each command has a single commander who is responsible for the
direction of his command toward the objective. Each command is to remain
unified under that commander.

- In the spiritual realm, this is the church under the headship of Jesus
Christ, and the local church under the headship of the pastor.

- In the local church, the pastor is responsible for directing his flock
toward the objective of spiritual maturity, mature love for God. The
responsibility of the flock is to remain unified under that command in
humility.

· He understands the principle of surprise.

- Surprise in some form is essential to obtain maximum effect in battle
with minimum loss. Surprise occurs in many categories of military
activity: time, place, direction, force, tactics, and weapons.

- God has applied the principle of surprise with regard to progressive
revelation, having portions of His truth concealed, even to the angels,
and even to His Son.

- Our application of surprise is in the content of our soul. We have the
right to privacy as Christians, and this privacy of the priesthood
extends to the angelic realm; we think in our own souls apart from the
intrusion of any creature save God Himself.

- With privacy, we have the advantage of surprise during testing, so
that there is a progressive revelation of our hearts through the course
of our lives.

· He understands the principle of Security.

- Security is defined in military science and tactics as all measures
which are taken to guard against observations, surprise,, and hostile
interference with effective maneuver. Security is designed to gain and
maintain the power of freedom of action.

- Eternal security is what God does for us in order to make us free. At
the moment we believe, we may have the confidence that our salvation
remains secure forever.

- Dismantling the cosmic complex and keeping it at bay is what we must
do to keep our offensive operation of spiritual momentum secure.

- Because sin entangles us on the course to our destiny, we must keep
its power to a minimum in our lives. When sin is minimized, we maximize
our freedom of action, especially related to our spiritual advance.

· He understands the principle of Simplicity.

- Simplicity means that all military plans, at any level of command,
must be simple and free from complicated maneuvers. Orders have to be
direct and free from contingencies. Frequent changes of plan should be
avoided, and the unity of command should be observed.

- “But the greatest commandment is this: to love the Lord your God with
all your heart and soul and might.”

- That is elegantly simple. Love God.

- We love God through our pursuit of the word.

- We love Him through our application of the word.

- We love Him through expressing praise and thanksgiving.

- We love Him through spreading the word in ambassadorial function.

- We love Him through depending on Him when we are helpless.

- We love Him through our enduring love for Him in both the distractions
of prosperity and the darkness of adversity.

- As long as you love God as He truly is, you will be within the bounds
of the simplicity of His plan.

· He understands the principle of cooperation.

- By cooperation is meant that all elements of a mission work together
for the achievement of the objective. This includes the principle of
teamwork. Cooperation within a command is attained when everyone
interprets his orders in an intelligent manner, and executes them in
accordance with the spirit and the intent of the authority issuing them.

- Between independent commanders, cooperation is attained by each
working for a common objective without reference to personal ambition.

- This is the necessity of virtue love in the local church. The mission
of the local church is for each individual of that body to achieve the
objective of mature love for God

- Therefore, personal ambition must be set aside, along with every form
of illicit judgment. Forgiveness must go out toward failure, and
tolerance toward idiosyncratic behavior.

- There must also be virtue in the great body of Christ when two people
from different local churches are in contact with one another.

- They must always approach the differences in the ministry with virtue,
so that there is no undue bickering and inordinate competition.

(c) Chaos always comes about as a result of sin and wrong priorities in
life; order enters in when truth is applied. Satan brings chaos, and God
order.

(5) Now God has the absolute and infinite power to bring about the
desire of His will. This is His sovereignty.

(a) God has volition, and since He is perfect, God’s volition always
acts in a right manner.

(b) God’s will is always supreme over creature volition. It is God’s
sovereign choice, however, to allow creatures free will.

(c) There is often a gap between desire and execution. God’s willpower
always bridges that gap.

(d) People of good character always have willpower. Understanding
justice and love and grace and order is useless without bringing it to
bear by means of will.

(6) The temperament of God is immutable, and therefore He does not
change. This characteristic applies to His willpower when it is tested,
and we call it faithfulness.

(a) Faithfulness is willpower extended over time.

(b) Faithfulness is not affected by adversity, nor is it distracted by
prosperity.

(c) God loves us both when we sin and when we love Him. He is faithful
even when we deny Him.

(d) Faithfulness is a desirable characteristic in creatures. Indeed we
must have it in order fulfill God’s plan, and to succeed in any endeavor
in life.

(e) Illustration: this ministry.

(7) God has integrity in communication.

(a) He is forthright, clear, sufficient, and honest when He
communicates.

(b) And of course He always keeps His word. This is His veracity.

There are often attacks against the character of Christ, but just as
often, and perhaps even more often, there are attacks against the
hypostatic union. The cults will either attack the deity or the humanity
of Christ in such a way as to undermine His mediatorship and His example
for the behavior of men.

Jesus Christ was and the Son of God, the Savior of the World. He was
both fully man and fully God. He died as the mediator between God and
man.

Herod’s paranoid response: “But Herod after hearing [these things] was
saying, ‘I personally beheaded John; but who is this man concerning whom
I am hearing such things? The one whom I beheaded, John, he is risen.
For this reason the miracles are working in him.’ And he kept on seeking
to see Him.”

See the section on the beheading of John the Baptist.

So Herod hears of Jesus, and remembers his personal involvement with the
beheading of John the Baptist. He even tells a little fib; that he
personally beheaded John, when in fact it was the royal executioner who
actually did the deed.

But Herod certainly saw the head on the platter, and recognized it as
belonging to John the Baptist. He knew objectively that the man was
dead.

The next part of his thinking is with regard to Christ. “Who is this man
concerning whom I am hearing such things?”

The delegation of John’s two disciples had returned to the household
prison, and reported to John about what they saw and heard from Jesus.
Did Herod hear about this? Surely he would be able to see that there
were two different men here!

Later, John was gruesomely murdered at the decree of Herod.

And after this, Herod concludes that John has risen. Herod has a
colossal complex of guilt. His conclusion was that John had risen from
the dead, and that God was out to get him.

Guilt is the true producer of all ghosts; Herod manufactures this ghost
from his guilt, and partly from his desire to hear the message of the
Baptist.

But now it is too late, and Herod fears the God of the Jews, thinking
that this will be an awful end to his life in some way. Remember that
“fear involves punishment” - 1 John 4:18.

Guilt can become the motivating factor in your life, impelling you
toward many foul actions. Indeed, many people in this world are enslaved
by a guilt complex.

There are two actions which resolve the problem of guilt in the life of
any believer in Jesus Christ.

(1) The ability to relate his sins to the atonement of the cross, and
realize that the burden of sin was borne by Jesus Christ.

(2) The establishment of spiritual momentum as the good faith measure of
pure motive and proper attitude toward grace.

According to Herod’s reasoning, having risen from the dead John now has
the gifts of miracles and healings.

And then Herod does something curious: He keeps on seeking to see Jesus,
whom he thinks is John. This is remarkable. He wants to see this man who
has risen from the dead.

Perhaps Herod wants to make a positive identification, so as to absolve
his guilt.

Perhaps Herod wants to kill him again.

Perhaps he desire to gain his forgiveness.

But what is again truly remarkable is the unbelief about Jesus. Herod
would rather believe that the ghost of John the Baptist has risen to
torment him than he would accept that Jesus is the Messiah of the Jews.

There had been quite a propaganda campaign just before the time of the
first advent. False messiahs and failed leaders galore. Indeed the
shadow of the messiah loomed over the Herod family as much as anyone.

10. This blinded them to the hand of God in the life of Christ. Only a
few who looked for the true and the good could see Him as He truly was.

The Beheading of John the Baptist
---------------------------------

Matthew 14:3-12

Mark 6:17-29,”

Exposition.

The Reason for John’s Imprisonment.

Herod sent out men to arrest and seize John the Baptist. He was then
chained and placed in prison.

It was this incident that caused Jesus to go through Samaria on His way
to Galilee. It was on account of this that He spent time with the
Samaritan woman at the well, and brought the town of Sychar into His
kingdom. This is narrated in Matthew 4:12 and John chapter four.

Herod Antipas had married Herodias, his sister in law and niece. She had
left Philip the Tetrarch, Herod Antipas’ half brother, for him.

Herodias was just a little bit older than Christ, now about 34-35 years
of age. She hated John the Baptist because he had preached against her
immoral and incestuous behavior.

John preached, saying OUK EXESTIN, ‘it is not right.’ This was by John’s
reckoning against the very laws of nature, and so it was.

This was more than just sex, it was a capital crime according to the law
of Moses. Leviticus 18:16 defines this marriage as incestual: “You shall
not uncover the nakedness of your brother’s wife; it is your brother’s
nakedness.” Verse 29 defines the punishment as requiring a ‘cutting off
from the people.’

So here is this ruling family over Galilee; they are only half-Jewish,
which made them the target of awful prejudice from the racist Jews. They
are incestuous, in direct contravention to the law of God. They should
be executed under capital punishment, but this ruling family lives above
the laws of the Jews.

Now John the Baptist has virtually joined the party of the Pharisees in
their crusade against this kind of immorality.

John has lost the focus of his ministry since the rapid ascension of
Christ’s popularity.

According to Josephus, John was no longer baptizing for the remission of
sins, but preaching that his baptism cleansed the body, while righteous
behavior cleansed the soul. John had moved to legalism in an attempt to
retain his following.

John is immensely popular, so that Herod Antipas and Herodias fear the
people will turn against them if they listen to the strident sermons of
this man.

10. Therefore they must stop him, and he is seized and chained and
thrown into prison. It is clear that John is imprisoned at the royal
quarters.

11. In the royal quarters there was a certain royal steward by the name
of Chuza. His wife was named Joanna, and it turns out that she is a
believer in Jesus Christ.

12. A steward was an OIKONOMOS, a manager of the royal household. All
logistical matters were a part of his domain.

When Herod ordered the seizure and imprisonment of John the Baptist, the
matter was delegated to Chuza.

While John was in prison, his care was the responsibility of Chuza.

13. If we were to construct a probable course of events it would be like
this:

John is imprisoned. He is befuddled by his imprisonment and the end of
his ministry. So much so that he has doubts that Jesus is truly the
Messiah.

But after John sends his disciples and they return with the news of the
healings and miracles, his doubts vanish like a desert mist, and he is
once again on the path to his destiny. This transpires over the course
of not more than a few days.

It is after this that John turns his contact with Chuza and his family
into a gospel opportunity, and Chuza’s wife Joanna becomes one of the
women’s auxiliary in support of Christ’s ministry.

14. “For Herod continually feared the crowd, because they held him as a
prophet, and knowing him as a righteous and holy man, he kept him safe,
and after hearing about him he was very perplexed, and he gladly heard
him.”

Herod gladly heard John the Baptist. The adverb is HADEOS, which means
glad in a cheerful but not ecstatic sense.

Herod was not overflowing with joy when he heard John the Baptist, but
he did so cheerfully.

And Herod really did listen to the Baptist, as indicated by the genitive
case of AUTOU. When the verb AKOUO takes its object in the genitive,
there is a sense of listening more carefully, and even obedience.

There is a distinct possibility that Herod believed at this point. But
even if he did it was swiftly forgotten.

But then Herod Antipas’ birthday came around, and it turned out to be a
fateful day.

The word EUKAIROU designates this as not only a special day due to it
being the time of Herod’s birthday, but also a fateful day in the
history of Israel. They were about to lose their greatest prophet of all
time.

Now there were great festivities planned for the day, and dignitaries,
both civilian and military had arrived to participate.

There were MEGISTASIN, people of great standing. That is, famous people
from around the land. Maybe Simon the Magician was present, up from
Samaria; maybe others who had gained fame during that time.

There were CHILIARCHOIS, that is, the high-ranking Roman military
officers who were stationed in Galilee. A chiliarchos was literally, a
‘ruler of a thousand.’ The modern battalion commander is about right for
this rank - perhaps a colonel. Well, there were more than just one of
these.

There were PROTOIS TES GALILAIAS - the ‘first men’ of Galilee. These
were the public leaders, the people on the ‘A’ list at all the parties.

Now there would be tax-gatherers - men who knew Matthew. There were
Romans. No question that there would be some from the leaders of the
Sadducees, the religious group that believed in social assimilation and
living for this life alone.

With the reputation of the Herodians, it would certainly be an
interesting proposition to go to one of their birthday parties; who
could tell what kind of degeneracy would be encountered? Perhaps these
guests would be nervous indeed.

At some point in the festivities, the daughter of Herodias came in to
dance. Her name was Salome.

The name Salome does not appear in the Bible. Rather, Josephus mentions
her in his histories of the Jews.

Salome is identified as a KORASIOU. This is the diminutive form of KORE,
which describes a young woman, usually a virgin. From this we can
conclude that Salome was very young, perhaps barely a teenager, or
perhaps even just short of that.

The most probable type of dance of the day was the PANTOMIMUS, a “solo
enactment of a popular story theme in stylized mimicry, often with
dramatic and sensual movements and postures” .

There would be a tremendous amount of charm in the story-telling and
sensual dance of this girl. Indeed, if she had learned anything from her
mother, it would be sexual allure, considering the reputation of
Herodias.

Herod was exceedingly pleased with her; and who knows the reaction of
the guests? The Sadducees would have gulped it down like some sumptuous
after-dinner fare. The Romans would react with more stoicism. But none
would desire to offend at this grand event.

Now the rest is a nightmare - an awful revelation of the degeneracy of
this family.

Herod is pleased with the dance of Salome. The verb is ERESEN, from
ARESKO, which means to take pleasure in a person or thing.

Now Herod was pleased, but there may have been ulterior motive; Salome
is the daughter of Herodias by Herod Philip. He certainly would desire
to please this little girl and so gain by the praise.

His praise turns out to be effusive. He offers her up to half of his
kingdom as a reward for her dance.

(1) Herod most likely feels safe in this proposal, since this girl is
his step-daughter, and so the kingdom will remain with him.

(a) This is not the first time in Bible history that such an offer has
been made.

(b) Beckon back to the time of Esther; Esther pleased King Xerxes so
much that he offered her anything she desired, up to half of his
kingdom.

(c) The irony in all of this is that the book of Esther contains the
account of an anti-Semitic plot.

(d) It is ironic because the request from Salome is going to require the
death of the greatest man of the age of Israel. And that is about as
anti-Semitic as you can get!

(e) You see, at the banquet of Xerxes, Queen Esther begged for her life,
and for the life of her people, the Jews. She begged for life, knowing
that Haman had hatched a plot to destroy them.

(f) But this Salome will be quite different. She begs for the death of
the greatest man of all the age of Israel. By Christ’s account, John is
greater than Moses or Elijah, Isaiah or Daniel or Zechariah. Greater
than any prophet in the 1400 years previous.

(2) But this is going to play out in tragedy, and you can almost feel
the dread as Salome leaves the room.

(3) Well Salome goes back to her mother, and asks her just what would be
good to ask, and immediately you get the impression that these two have
hatched a plot.

(4) And you know by her request that Herodias is an evil woman. It
wasn’t enough for her that John was cast into prison at her command; it
was her measure of revenge to take his life.

(5) And indeed this was revenge, for she had a long-standing grudge with
this prophet of God, and she was going to see it through.

(a) This was not only a failure to forgive, which is the case for every
grudge; it was a failure to forgive when the suffering was deserved.

(b) That’s why this is tragic from every angle. John the Baptist lost
his focus, and moved his ministry from Christ to the Herodians; Herodias
hated what he had done, unveiling her evil before all the people so that
she was completely hated by them.

(c) Leviticus 19:18 puts it very well: “You shall not take vengeance,
nor bear any grudge against the sons of your people, but you shall love
your neighbor as yourself; I am the Lord.”

(d) Instead, vengeance belongs to the Lord, and be confident that He
will repay.

(e) Luke 6:37, “Do not judge, and you will not be judged. Do not
condemn, and you will not be condemned. Forgive, and you will be
forgiven.”

(f) Whenever you fail to forgive, you have committed a failure to orient
that other person’s sin to the cross.

(g) Truly you are attempting to bear the burden of the cross, which was
already carried by Jesus Christ Himself.

(h) And you should know that it is common for those with guilt complexes
to hold grudges against others.

(i) But Herodias didn’t just demand the execution of John. She demanded
that his severed head be brought on a platter to be seen by all these
birthday guests.

· And so it is clear that her motivation not only includes revenge
against John, but also against Herod Antipas, her husband.

· She knew that this request would bring great shame upon him before all
of his honored guests. She knew that they would say nothing of the
incident - nothing to his face, that is.

· She knew how this would fester within Herod, and how he would eat away
at himself over it.

· She was motivated to destroy this man whom she had been so anxious to
marry not so long ago. Probably less than a year. This reveals a great
hatred.

· To Herodias, men are a way to gain power; men are weak before her
charms, easily manipulated; but never are men to be trusted, never to be
loved. She is chained to their power in a male-dominated society, but
she overcomes by means of their weakness.

(j) “And after entering immediately with speed before the king, she
asked, saying, ‘I want right away in order for you to give to me upon a
platter the head of John the Baptist.’”

· Mark portrays the speed with which things happened after the agreement
between mother and daughter.

· The girl enters the dining room META SPOUDES - with speed. In fact,
Mark’s gospel even says EUTHUS - ‘immediately.’ This adverb shows
decisiveness and swiftness to conclusion.

· And more than this - Salome makes her demand, and demands that it be
done EXAUTES ‘right away.’ This is literally, ‘from this point in time.’

· So included in the demand is the timing of the act. Salome wants that
head immediately.

· It snatches the breath away to realize the soul of this young girl.
For she has added the speed and the demand for immediate action all by
herself.

· It tears out the heart to realize what utter degeneracy she has at her
young age. How decisive she is toward this callused and heinous request!

(6) Herod does not want to do this.

(a) There are two reasons why he rationalizes the necessity of the act.

· First, because of his oath. He feels he must have integrity toward his
word.

· Second, because of the dinner guests. He feels that to renege on the
oath would be to lose face before all of these dignitaries, both Roman
and Jewish.

(b) But of course this is an act of utter immorality, and entirely aside
from the holy character of God.

· There is a verse that is the perfect counterpoint to this whole
incident. 1 John 5:14, “This is the confidence which we have before Him,
that, if we ask anything according to His will, He hears us.”

· Well Herod Antipas had no standards, and so you could ask anything of
him, and he would give it, even if it was evil.

· There is no limit from the throne of grace. You may have it all if it
is according to God’s will.

· But God’s ability to answer your requests never extends to the realm
of evil. His integrity will not allow it.

(c) Herod has an absence of self-esteem to do the right thing.

· You must have a detachment of will in order to bring about what is
right in your life.

· That is, your decision-making process must be apart from worldly
factors.

· You cannot make decisions on the basis of what other people think, or
what the world demands.

· Herod, the ruler of this region, the man of highest rank present, does
not have the self-esteem to eat his pride and tell this little girl that
she is wrong to request what is evil.

· He is afraid of what these lesser-ranking persons are going to think
of him. He sees breaking this oath as a weakness, when in reality the
girl has broken the oath before him.

· She has broken the spirit of integrity within the oath, and therefore
abrogated Herod’s necessity toward veracity.

· Self-esteem comes from a sense of what is right, and especially who is
important.

· If you see yourself as God sees you, then you will gain resolve in
staying on the side of right.

· But Herod was more worried that his dinner guests would see him as a
weak man, than whether he should do the right thing.

· It would have been so easy to say to take the girl aside and tell her
that this could not be so.

· This would not be the end of Antipas weakness. In the Passover after
next, Antipas is in Jerusalem when the trial of Jesus takes place. As a
courtesy, Pontius Pilate sends Christ to Antipas, deferring to his
rulership of Galilee, Christ’s home province.

- Luke 23:8-12, “(8) Now Herod was very glad when he saw Jesus; for he
had wanted to see Him for a long time, because he had been hearing about
Him and was hoping to see some sign performed by Him. (9) And he
questioned Him at some length; but He answered him nothing. (10) And the
chief priests and the scribes were standing there, accusing Him
vehemently. (11) And Herod with his soldiers, after treating Him with
contempt and mocking Him, dressed Him in a gorgeous robe and sent Him
back to Pilate. (12) Now Herod and Pilate became friends with one
another that very day; for before they had been enemies with each
other.”

- So Herod has a chance to set Jesus free and redeem himself of his
weakness against John the Baptist. He fails, and as a result, Jesus
would die.

(d) That this young girl could even make this request of her uncle
indicates that she is a monster-child.

· No one ever says no to Salome. She knows how to tantrum; she knows how
to manipulate; she knows how to pout.

· If Herod says no to Salome here, he risks a nuclear tantrum. He would
rather have some prophet die than undergo that.

· Even if he should insist on the wrongness of it, he knows that he will
pay dearly for it.

· Herod has made this magnanimous offer to his niece because of the
dinner guests. He wants to impress them with the greatness of his
generosity.

· Now she asks of him something awful. But he cannot lose out on his
scheme to impress them, so he goes through with it.

So Herod sends for the executioner to follow through with the request.

(1) The prison was a part of the palace compound; it would take a while
for the executioner to walk there, summon John to a suitable place of
execution, place his head upon a platter, and then return to the girl.

(2) You can perhaps imagine John in his prison cell. Resting, praying,
exercising - all according to a daily regimen. And in comes the
executioner with sword. It is time.

(3) John has barely time to think and pray - the briefest of prayers
comes from his lips and then the infamy is performed.

(a) It is at that moment that his soul is placed into an interim body,
and he is transferred to Paradise in Hades.

(b) There he meets the presence of God face to face and comes to know
the truth about himself and about Jesus. He has left the sinful flesh
behind.

(c) There he receives the reception of a hero as the greatest prophet in
the age of Israel.

(d) You can perhaps imagine a delegation of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
and Daniel. Moses and David, Elijah, Elisha, and Samuel stand at the
forefront. All around are Hosea and Amos and Zechariah; Habakkuk and
Zephaniah and Malachi. There also are Nahum and Joel and Jonah. Obadiah,
Haggai, and Micah stand there, all stand in respect.

(e) All these great men desire to question the Great One, the one who
prepared the way for the Messiah. All of them defer and listen humbly as
John tells of his personal contact with the one who will be King of
kings and Lord of lords.

(4) And then jump forward in time to just a year and a little more
later.

(a) It is another day in paradise. There is worship, and there is
conversation. Conversation, I think, to which the angels would long to
listen.

(b) The men there speak of their times and their longing for the Messiah
and the details of his life.

(c) Suddenly there is a grumbling in Torments, across the Great Gulf
Fixed; the everyday moan of the damned is momentarily silenced, and an
impossibly bright light appears. John, Elijah, and the rest rise again
with a thrill and gather to the edge of the Gulf.

(d) Could it be? Who is it? Is it… Yes. Yes it is! A stunned silence
follows His words, and then He approaches across the Gulf. The great
crowd of Old Testament saints gathers around the Savior.

(e) And in that time He pronounces that the work of salvation is done. A
shout! A cheer goes up, and every knee bows and every tongue there
confesses that Jesus Christ is Lord.

(f) It is now time to leave this Paradise and go on to Heaven, and the
Savior leads them all in a victorious procession. What triumph and what
joy! What purity of worship.

(5) But back at the palace, back at the birthday party again, as the
stunned guests sit and lay at the remains of their dinners, in comes the
executioner with John’s head on a platter.

(a) You can only imagine the horror of the dinner guests as they see
this spectacle before them.

(b) Even the hardened CHILIARCHS of the Roman Army must be appalled at
what they observe here, for the palace is no place for this kind of
violence.

(6) Herod and Herodias ruled Galilee for ten more years or so, until
Herodias schemed to gain her husband true kingship through the Roman
emperor.

(a) Gaius became disgusted with the scheming of this woman, and he
distrusted Antipas greatly.

(b) Instead of kingship, Gaius gave Antipas exile to Gaul, and in Lyon.
Herodias chose to join him, even after being offered exemption from the
exile of her husband. From that moment they are never mentioned again by
the chroniclers of history. But in a way they are.

(c) They lived in Lyon, in central Gaul, in the middle of a different
nowhere from Tiberias in Galilee.

(d) A century and a half later, Lyon became famous for its persecution
of Christians - persecution unto death. The heritage of Herod Antipas
and his niece/sister in law/wife lived on.

(7) And then one day, Herod Antipas dies; and also Herodias and Salome
in their times. And they go to Torments in Hades.

(a) There they three reside for centuries, full of fear and
anticipation; still the hatred reigns in their souls.

(b) And one day there in Torments they hear a commotion - an assembly is
called, and all are forced to attend. Herod Antipas and his second wife
and her daughter grudgingly gather around a man, and Herod has some
shreds of recognition.

(c) Here is the man that he always wanted to see, standing before him
even now. Herod Antipas leans forward in spite of himself, to listen
again.

(d) But there is no speech this time; only a massive figure in chains,
chains of darkness, so that the figure is obscured. Yet Herod knows with
fear that this figure is Satan, the great hope of the sinfully enslaved.
And the chaining of the Great Enslaver represents the total defeat of
their false hope. Herod and Herodias and Salome are crushed at this
moment, and the agony of what is to come in a 1000 years is multiplied
greatly.

(e) The 1000 years passes with the agonizing emotion of the anticipation
of something truly awful. And then Herod Antipas is called before the
Great White Throne, and he finally gets his audience with Christ.

· And yet Herod is completely humble before this King of kings and Lord
of lords. He cannot stand before this throne as king; he cannot demand
from Christ an accounting of His ministry.

· There before Herod Antipas is the evidence of his folly in the nail
holes in the hands and feet of the Savior of the World.

· Herod is no longer the one to be feared, the one in control.

· The sentence is passed, and he is cast into the Lake of Fire for an
eternity of pain. So he will exit the scene of history.

A Transitional Passage.

The Translations:

Mark 6:30, “And the apostles gathered before Jesus and reported to Him
all the significant things they did and taught.”

Luke 9:10a, “And after the apostles returned they gave an account to Him
of the significant things they had done.”

Harmony: “And after the apostles returned, they gathered before Jesus
and reported to Him all the significant things they did and taught.”

Exposition.

So a period of time has passed since Christ sent out the disciples to
preach to the towns in Galilee.

There is no record of what Christ was doing at this same time; perhaps
the exact same thing.

The disciples gather back to Christ and give a report on the significant
events of their lives - what they did and what they taught.

They did miracles and performed healings; they taught about the Kingdom
of Christ. They told Him of the responses of the crowd - of victories
and defeats along the way.

How they must have loved to see Him listen; how they must have glowed
when He approved, and even when He made corrections.

Christ gave them also the camaraderie of mutual experience. They were
now truly fellow-workers in the gospel. He is developing initiative and
leadership in them by this way. They know now that they are like Christ
in His work.

Our lives should be like this through prayer.

We should often report the significant events our lives to God the
Father.

The victories and defeats, and the concerns which we encounter along the
way.

We should also note the significance of our mutual experiences with
Christ. That is, we should realize that nothing we have encountered has
eluded the experience of the Son of God.

Jesus’ Withdrawal from Galilee
------------------------------

Matthew 14:13-14: “(13) Now Jesus, after hearing [them] withdrew from
there in a boat into a deserted place by Himself; and the multitudes,
after hearing, followed Him on foot from the cities. (14) And after
going out [from the boat] He saw a great multitude and felt compassion
for them and He healed their sick.”

Mark 6:31-34: “(31) And He says to them, ‘You yourselves go by
yourselves to a deserted place and rest a short while.’ For there were
many coming and going, and they did not have significant time to eat.
(32) And they left in the boat for a deserted place by themselves. (33)
And they saw them going, and many recognized them and ran there together
on foot from all the cities, and preceded them. (34) And after going out
[from the boat], He saw a great crowd and felt compassion for them,
because they were like sheep having no shepherd, and He began to teach
them many things.”

Luke 9:10b-11: “(10) And after receiving them He withdrew by Himself
into a city called Bethsaida. (11) And the crowds after knowing [this]
followed Him; and after welcoming them He was speaking to them
concerning the Kingdom of God, and curing the ones having need of
healing.”

John 6:1-3, “(1) After these things Jesus went out to the other shore of
the Sea of Galilee of Tiberias. (2) Now a great crowd followed Him,
because they were witnessing the signs He was doing upon the weak. (3)
And Jesus went onto the mountain and there He sat with His disciples.”

The disciples’ ministry had become much like Jesus’. They had healed the
sick and done miracles and cast out demons, and as a result, the crowds
began to gather.

The disciples were so swamped that they did not have significant time to
eat. They had absolutely no time to themselves.

This being true, they surely had no time before God, either, and so they
were in a state of spiritual and logistical compromise.

Christ has experienced this in His own ministry, so He knew exactly what
to do. He told them to go to a deserted place and rest for a short
while.

During that rest they could spiritually and physically restore
themselves.

Two related principles come out:

There are needy people in the world; needy physically, emotionally,
logistically, and spiritually. If you are able to meet those needs
through ministry, you are going to be swamped. In the devil’s world, you
will never run out of people to minister to.

But you must learn to withdraw from your ministry to recharge yourself
spiritually and physically. The needy will still be there when you get
back, and the Lord can take care of them in between. You must withdraw
every day for spiritual growth, and from time to time to replenish
yourself in other ways.

Your ministry will vanish if you neglect your relationship with God,
because the river of your ministry flows from the spring of your time
with the Father.

And this applies equally to all ministries related to Christian service
and spiritual gifts.

It doesn’t matter if you are an anonymous person with the gift of helps
or a well-known evangelist. You will not only fail to reach the
objective, but you will compromise your reward at the judgment seat.

Ultimately, you will let others down because of that. Ministries fail
because congregations eat their pastors alive, and he lets them.

Now the rest mainly has to do with geography.

Jesus and His disciples are both on the Tiberias shore of the Sea of
Galilee. Tiberias is on the southwest side of the Sea.

They go in separate boats to escape from the crowd.

The disciples leave first, and the text does not indicate which
direction they go. We can only construe it from the fact that they end
up at the same location as Jesus. Since Jesus headed toward Bethsaida,
and the disciples left from there with Him to go up onto a mountain,
they must have headed toward the same place.

But the Sea of Galilee is very small, and any boat is visible from any
place on the shore. As the boat with Jesus’ disciples deployed, the
crowds saw the direction, and began to run around the shore to the other
side.

It was very likely a calm day, because the crowds were able to make
there way around the shore by foot, and still precede the sailboats that
were taking a more direct route.

The disciples land at Bethsaida or thereabouts, and once more they are
swamped by the crowds. Their attempt to escape has temporarily failed.

But Christ waits until after the disciples have left, and He follows
behind. The crowds also anticipate His arrival, and so they are waiting
for Him just the same as His disciples.

But Christ sees the crowds, and He feels compassion; again they are like
sheep without a shepherd.

These peoples are in a leadership vacuum; neither the Romans or the Jews
are providing leadership to meet the needs of the people.

As such, they are lost, unable to find their way in the helplessness of
their sins.

So Christ has a twofold remedy to this problem:

(1) First, He teaches them many things about the kingdom. He sees this
body of truth as the solution to their problems.

(2) Second, He heals their sick. This second so that they will certainly
grasp what He is saying about the kingdom. This is a clue that atonement
really is a part of Christ’s kingdom ministry. Atonement was necessary
to bring Israel into the millennium.

So as a matter of course the crowds now follow Jesus - because He was
healing their weak.

(1) Not necessarily because of His kingdom ministry.

(2) At the very core of this description is a rejection of the kingdom
ministry. This is also a good example what happens today in another
fashion.

(3) People tend to fall in love with the accoutrements of church without
getting to the heart of the matter.

(a) They love the society of good people without finding love for God
Himself.

(b) They love the peace of a sanctuary without knowing the God Who
causes the peace.

(c) They love the stability of liturgy and ritual without learning its
lessons and while neglecting the greater informational power of church
age mystery doctrine.

(d) They love the approbation that they get from their ministers without
realizing the need for autonomy before God.

At last Jesus and His disciples go up onto a mountain. This is somewhere
near Bethsaida.

It could be up the Jordan River a number of miles, on or near Mt.
Hermon. It could be one of the small hills nearer to Bethsaida. The
mountain itself is not specified.

From the narrative which follows, it is clear that Jesus and His
disciples would not be alone on the mountain.

The text does not say whether it was their desire to escape the crowds,
but perhaps this is so. There would be no other clear reason to go to
the mountain.

Jesus sat down with His disciples. He has time alone with them, teaching
and training important things, theological and practical.

This now becomes the setting for a remarkable series of events that will
culminate in the Bread of Life discourse.

The Feeding of the Five Thousand
--------------------------------

Matthew 14:15-23

Mark 6:35-46

Luke 9:12-17

John 6:4-15.

Exposition.

Introduction.

Look for two things here: an interesting symbolism of the Passover, and
a specific preparation for the bread of life discourse.

Christ is going to take advantage of this miracle that God has provided,
and communicate terrific doctrine from it.

So take note of the way this works; an opportunity presents itself;
Christ performs the miracle by the power of the Spirit, and then a
lesson will be taught. This is standard fare for the incarnation.

A quick note is necessary on the harmony. The synoptic gospels have a
generic viewpoint on the interchange between Christ and the disciples;
no one speaker is mentioned. They are portrayed as coming to our Lord as
a group, and talking as a group.

But the gospel of John does one better; it identifies the speakers
within the group as Philip and then Andrew. In the harmony, the
viewpoint of John’s gospel is taken, and the other omitted entirely.

The setting: “Now the Passover was near, the feast of the Jews. Now
after evening came and the hour was very late.”

You may recall that Christ has recently sent out His disciples on their
evangelistic efforts, and they have returned.

Also, Christ and the disciples have failed in their endeavor to escape
the crowds, even though they crossed the Sea of Galilee on boats. So now
the crowds have gathered again.

John’s gospel records that the Passover feast of the Jews was near.

We have a rare chronological marker in this. It is Passover, Spring of
AD 29; is nearly one year from the death of Jesus Christ by crucifixion.

And there is also something remarkable in this. It is that time of year
in which the people of the land should be thinking about going up to
Jerusalem for the Feast of feasts.

They should be gathering what they need, and making arrangements to stay
with family, or at least at an inn. They should be remembering the
Psalms of Ascent, and heading for the spiritual capital of the world.

But instead they are following Christ around the countryside, seeing His
miracles and listening to His teaching. There is a frenzy here that
disregards even the most important religious event of the year.

No wonder the Pharisees were so concerned! They knew that they were
going to have low attendance at their version of an Easter service, and
that really bothered them.

The setting is a mountainside on the Northern shore of the Sea of
Galilee, not too far from Capernaum. There is a crowd arrayed there,
waiting in anticipation for Christ to do something or at least to say
something.

It is getting late. Mark says it is late, while Luke says the day was
starting to decline. You can mark the time as right at dusk on the basis
of this.

The disciples’ request concerning logistics for the crowd. “the
disciples came to Him saying, ‘The place is deserted and the hour is
already past; release the crowds, so that after they go forth into the
surrounding countryside and villages they might lodge and buy food for
themselves, because we are in a deserted place.’”

The disciples here make some observations about the condition of the
crowd, but I think it is legitimate at least to say the following:

The crowd has been there for a day; they have no great need for
immediate logistics. If they don’t eat, they won’t die.

The same could be said for lodging. A night out under the stars would
probably do them a fair amount of good. They could all huddle together
for warmth and be fine. Only if it were raining would shelter be an
issue, and rain was not all that common.

These are relevant because they uncover the souls of the disciples. At
the very core of this all is a single fact: if the crowd wanted to do
that, they would have done so on their own initiative.

Therefore we can conclude that the disciples were for some reason
anxious to get rid of the crowds. And this we already knew from the
previous passage in our Life of Christ series.

They are mistaken about one thing: they say, ‘release the crowds.’ They
say this to Christ when the crowds are staying because they want to. The
verb is APOLUSON, and in this context it connotes letting the crowd
disperse, to become a non-crowd.

The disciples see this as a golden opportunity to get rid of this crowd
so that they can all finally have some peace and quiet. But Christ does
not.

Christ now sees an opportunity to teach something new to His disciples,
and so He waits.

Jesus’ Response and Testing of His Disciples. “Therefore Jesus, after
lifting up His eyes and beholding that a great crowd came to Him, says
to Philip, ‘Where should we buy bread in order that we might feed
these?’ And this He said testing him; for He knew what he was about to
do. Philip answered Him, ‘Two hundred denarii of bread is not sufficient
for them that each might receive a little.’”

John’s gospel takes over the narrative now.

Jesus lifts up His eyes and beholds the crowd. Two participles set the
scene with a dramatic sweep.

The first aorist participle is EPARAS, He lifts up His eyes. You can see
Christ on the mountain, concentrating on something at hand - perhaps a
scroll of the Old Testament scriptures; perhaps a conversation.

He looks up to see what His disciples are talking about, and there is
the crowd. The aorist participle THEASAMENOS records His surprise and
the significant nature of the crowd. It always denotes the seeing of
something important and significant to the viewer.

Philip is the one. Jesus chooses to test him. Perhaps because he is the
nearest; perhaps because he needed the test.

John 1:43-46, “(43) The next day He purposed to go into Galilee, and He
found Philip. And Jesus said to him, ‘Follow Me.’ (44) Now Philip was
from Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter. (45) Philip found
Nathanael and said to him, ‘We have found Him of whom Moses in the Law
and also the Prophets wrote - Jesus of Nazareth, the son Joseph.’ (46)
Nathanael said to him, ‘Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?’ Philip
said to him, ‘Come and see.’

John 14:7-11, “(7) If you had known Me, you would have known My Father
also; from now on you know Him, and have seen Him.’ (8) Philip said to
Him, ‘Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for us.’ (9) Jesus said
to him, ‘Have I been so long with you, and yet you have not come to know
Me, Philip? He who has seen Me has seen the Father; how can you say,
‘Show us the Father?’ (10) Do you not believe that I am in the Father,
and the Father is in Me? The words that I say to you I do not speak on
My own initiative, but the Father abiding in Me does His works. (11)
Believe Me that I am in the Father and the Father is in Me; otherwise
believe because of the works themselves.’”

Philip was one of the seven to serve table to the widows of the early
church, Acts 6:1-6.

Philip went to Samaria and preached the gospel after the scattering from
Saul’s persecution. He was very powerful, and the people responded with
joy. Acts 8:4-8.

After he believed, Simon the magician joined Philip’s evangelistic tour.

After the Samaritan tour, God the Holy Spirit guided Philip south and
west of Jerusalem to give the gospel to the Ethiopian eunuch.

When the eunuch went on his way home, Philip preached his way northward
along the Mediterranean seacoast until he reached Caesarea, which is
almost even with the Sea of Galilee.

Jesus asks Philip where they might buy bread to feed all of the crowd.
You can see right away that this is not a serious question.

It is not a serious question, because the crowd is so large, and their
treasury so small. Jesus knows His question is ludicrous from the moment
it passes His lips.

In fact, He employs the adverb of place POTHEN to emphasize this very
thing: He says, ‘Where…’

The only reasonable answer is nowhere, and that is what Jesus intends to
demonstrate with the adverb. There is no place on earth that they can
buy bread at such a low price so as to feed all the people that are
arrayed on the mountain before them.

Any fool would know that this was not a real possibility, and so the
question is largely rhetorical.

But Philip has a tendency to take everything at face value.

And this He said testing him; for He knew what he was about to do.

John has the insider’s view as Christ’s closest friend. Christ wanted to
test Philip, who took everything at face value, and often took an
analytical human viewpoint.

Christ knew of this miracle beforehand; He knew exactly what the Spirit
was going to do through Him.

This forms a counterpoint to the woman with the hemorrhage. In that
incident, Christ had no idea what the Spirit was going to do. The Spirit
saw the woman reach out to touch Christ, and made the sovereign decision
to heal her.

Christ had to be humble to the leading of the Spirit, but here there is
knowledge beforehand of what will be done. Christ has His will involved
in the performance of this miracle.

Christ sees the appropriate symbol of the bread, and of spiritual food.
He knows that this will be just right as a lesson for His disciples and
for this crowd. And He knows that the Spirit will honor the symbol
because it is in perfect line with the will of God.

“Philip answered Him, ‘Two hundred denarii of bread is not sufficient
for them that each might receive a little.’”

To get an idea of the amount of money here, a denarius was about a day’s
wage; perhaps 50 dollars by today’s American standard of minimum wage.
Two hundred denarii would come out to about a thousand dollars, or
somewhat less than twenty cents a head, considering women and children.
Twenty cents worth of bread is not a great amount. This is Philip’s
point.

But more than this is the fact that Philip takes Jesus seriously. He
misses the point about the ludicrous nature of the question.

“But after formulating an answer He said to them, ‘They have no need to
leave. You yourselves give to them to eat.’ One of His disciples says to
Him, Andrew the brother of Simon Peter, ‘There is a boy here who has
five barley loaves and two preserved fish; but what are these things for
so many?’ For there were about five thousand men outside of women and
children.

Before the command comes a factual statement: they have no need to
leave. So Christ gives the disciples a cue that He is quite serious this
time, even though the statement and the command will seem funny.

Now our Lord changes the question into a command, because He is turning
to His miracle and His lesson.

Remember that Jesus has only just put a ludicrous question to Philip;
now He puts a totally ludicrous command to them, in order to test their
faith.

But it is a command.

Now you would think that by this time, after being with the Messiah for
nearly two years, that the disciples would not hesitate to obey. That
somehow they would be sensitive to His peculiar way of doing a miracle.
All it takes is a simple trust.

And especially after he made such an issue out the silliness of trying
to feed them by buying enough bread for each to have just a little.

Especially key is the statement of Christ that there is no NEED to
leave.

The Greek phrase is OU CHREIAN ECHOUSIN APELTHEIN.

There is great wisdom in this, and it is the true set-up for the bread
of life discourse. They have no need to leave, but they do have need of
truth. So let’s take this assumption and develop it a little.

There are two major reasons why you need God’s word.

(1) First, because it leads unto salvation.

(2) Second, because it leads unto eternal reward.

But there are many other benefits.

(1) God’s word gives you a clear understanding of your origins as a
human being.

(2) God’s word gives you a clear understanding of your destiny as a
believer.

(3) God’s word gives you a clear understanding of yourself, your
weaknesses and your strengths.

(4) God’s word warns you against self-destruction and equips you against
it.

(5) God’s word gives you recovery from degeneracy.

(6) God’s word gives you wisdom in all avenues of life: love, work, and
play.

(7) God’s word is the source of true and lasting peace in life.

(8) God’s word supplies a place of calm in every storm of life.

(9) God’s word provides confidence and capacity for enjoyment in all
times of prosperity.

(10) God’s word furnishes comfort in every hurt and grief of life.

Therefore, all of us should have a doctrinal orientation to life. This
is based on God’s perfect communication to us.

(1) Doctrinal orientation to life is the total trust and dependence on
the Word of God in answering life’s questions and solving life’s
problems.

(2) Doctrinal orientation to life assumes that there is no problem so
great or complex that the Word of God cannot provide the solution.

(3) Doctrinal orientation to life assumes that there is not question
about life that God cannot answer.

(4) Doctrinal orientation to life gives believers confidence about the
future, come what may.

(5) Doctrinal orientation to life results in dedication to the faith
perception of the truth.

(6) Doctrinal orientation results in good decisions from a position of
strength, and a better orientation to God’s direct will for your life.

(7) Doctrinal orientation to life approaches life from the viewpoint of
priorities.

The command is for the disciples to give the crowd to eat.

Christ commands them to find the food from their own resources, and this
apart from purchasing it from their own treasury.

So they must fall back on their own resources, and this is where Andrew
enters the picture.

Andrew is an interesting disciple, because he does one of most important
things of all time - he introduces his brother Peter to Christ.

John 1:40-42, “(40) One of the two who heard John speak and followed
Him, was Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother. (41) He found first his own
brother Simon and said to him, ‘We have found the Messiah.’ (42) He
brought him to Jesus.”

When Andrew finds the Messiah, the first thing he did was get his
brother. And by doing so, Andrew had role in changing the world.

10. Andrew has a basic obedience, but his rational mind at the same time
protests. ‘There is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two
preserved fish; but what are these things for so many?’

There is a constant tension between the disciples’ obedience and their
rational thinking.

All of their lives they had been conditioned to think and believe in a
way that excluded the miraculous and supernatural.

Remember that these men lived in an age devoid of prophets and
supernatural manifestations of God’s work. So it had been for many
generations, since the prophet Malachi ceased his work.

This represents an ingrained pattern of thinking for these adult men.
They are 20, 30, 40 years old, and used to thinking in such rational
patterns.

Their way of solving problems has to do with the earthly and natural
frame of reference, and they find much difficulty in shaking loose from
that.

Whether it is calming the storm or feeding the five thousand or walking
on the water, the disciples have difficulty in seeing that Christ has
the power of God to do miracles.

But really important in this doing of miracles is the reason. According
to a system of priorities, miracles are done in order to focus on
relationship with God.

This miracle is a fine example. The people are gathered to hear the
word. Christ is not going to disappoint them. Since it is more important
for them to hear of Christ’s kingdom, a miracle should be done here.

And this is the way in which Christ desires His disciples to think. If
the reason is right, God has the power to bring it about.

It would not be until the resurrection that the disciples would fully
understand this principle. And even then it took some convincing.

This event is all the more remarkable in that it occurs after the
disciples had been sent out, and performed their own miracles and
healings. You would think that if they had seen God’s work through their
own hands, they would begin to assume that it would go through the hands
of Christ.

11. “For there were about five thousand men outside of women and
children.”

Jesus’ orders concerning the food and the crowd: “And He said, ‘Bring
them here to me.” And Jesus said, ‘Order the crowds to recline on the
grass group by group in numbers not above fifty.’ For there was much
grass in the place. And the disciples did so, reclining them all. They
fell company by company by the hundred and by the fifty.”

Our Lord desires to set this up in an orderly fashion. He wants this
done with maximum efficiency.

He first orders the loaves and fishes brought to Him; He is going to be
the originating point of the distribution - the source of the miracle.

And second He tells His disciples to arrange the crowd just so - group
by group in numbers not above fifty.

There are perhaps eight or ten or even fifteen thousand people out
there; five thousand men alone.

So Christ is suggesting more than one hundred groups of fifty. This
mountain must be arranged like a sporting event.

And Christ says for them to recline on the grass. This is for the
purpose of a meal. They must have been standing, waiting restlessly for
something to happen. And would it ever.

It is John who mentions that there was much grass in that place. Anyone
familiar with the countryside would understand that unless there is
grass, this is going to be no picnic. Grass is a blanket on which the
people may recline.

Mark records that they fell company by company by the hundred and by the
fifty.

It should not be too great a surprise that they disobeyed. The crowd was
a little bit disorderly in carrying out this command.

But there they are, arrayed before Christ in their own groups. You can
feel the rustle of anticipation moving through the groups.

Being organized in such a manner, they knew that something was about to
happen, and that it had to do with food.

This crowd of five or ten thousand is not so great. Every person there
will be able to perceive this miracle. Imagine the layout of Coors
Field; that edifice is set up for 50,000 baseball fans. If only ten
thousand show up, all of them will have excellent seats where they can
perceive clearly what the players are doing.

So it is with this arrangement. They will all see Christ break the bread
and the fish and know for certain that there is only so much in those
few loaves and fishes. You see, they will know - certainly know - that
this is a miracle.

The blessing and breaking of the bread, and the distribution of the food
unto all: “After receiving the five loaves and the two fish, after
looking up toward heaven He gave the blessing, and after breaking the
loaves He kept on giving them to the disciples that they might set them
before the crowd, and the two fish He divided for all, as many as they
wanted.”

Christ gave the blessing after looking up toward heaven.

This provides a quick insight into Christ’s posture during prayer.

Our custom of bowing in humility came not from Christ, and not from
Paul.

1 Corinthians 11:3-13, “(3) Now I want you to understand that Christ is
the head of every man, and the husband is the head of a wife, and God is
the head of Christ. (4) Every man who holds down the head while praying
or prophesying is ashamed of his head. (5) But every woman who prays
with an uncovered head is ashamed of her head. (6) For if a woman does
not cover her head also let her be sheared; but if the shearing or
shaving is shame for a woman, then let her be covered. (7) For a man
ought not to have his head covered, being the image and glory of God;
but the woman is the glory of man. (8) For man is not from woman, but
woman from man. (9) For indeed man was not created for the woman, but
woman for the man. (10) For this reason the woman ought to have
authority over her head because of the angels. (11) However, a woman is
neither apart from man, nor is man apart from a woman in the Lord; (12)
For as the woman is from the man, so also the man comes through the
woman; and all are from God. (13) Judge for yourselves in this: is it
fitting for a woman to pray uncovered before God? (14) Does not even
nature itself teach you that if a man has long hair, it is a dishonor to
him, (15) but if a woman has long hair, it is a glory to her? For her
hair is given to her for a covering. (16) Now if anyone presumes to be
contentious, we do not have such a practice, nor do the churches of
God.”

This passage is about authority orientation. Authority goes from God to
Christ to man to woman. There is a concentration here not on the church
but on the marriage relationship.

Holding down the head is a symbol of shame; the leader in the church
ought not to do such a thing - the one prophesying or praying.

But a woman who prays with an uncovered head is ashamed of her head.
This stands as a reference to authority; the woman is never to pray
outside of the authority of her spiritual head; an uncovered head is one
without authority.

We say this: we say that authority is an umbrella which covers our head.
Paul had a similar idea - that authority is covering for the head.

So the husband is the spiritual authority in his household, and he ought
not to pray with his head hanging down, as though he were ashamed of his
authority, Jesus Christ.

But the woman who prays out from under the authority of her husband is
ashamed of her husband.

And Paul says that the woman who is out from under the authority of her
man should have her hair sheared, because it will teach her about shame.
But if she does not like having her head sheared, then she must submit
to her husband’s spiritual authority.

But the man should not have his head covered; that is, he should not
have his wife in authority over him; the reason is clear: the man is the
image of God.

(1) And don’t we know that the image of God has to do with ruling
authority?

(2) So the man is the image and glory of God (in his imitation).

(3) But the woman is the glory of the man (in her imitation of him).

The woman came originally from the man; she is Adam’s rib.

This order of creation sets an order of precedence and the pattern for
authority.

(1) As the first-born son has the right to inheritance, so also the
first-born of the race have rights to authority.

(2) Jesus Christ is the first-born of all creation and the first-born of
the dead, Colossians 3:15-18.

The conclusion is that the woman was made for the man, and not
vice-versa; and because of this she must remain under the man’s
authority.

Verse 10 just about interprets the whole passage: “For this reason the
woman ought to have authority over her head because of the angels.”

(1) This translation is quite literal; there is not the least hint that
it should be interpreted as ‘symbol of authority’ or some other
legalistic nonsense.

(2) The woman fell prey to Satan, the fallen angel in the garden. Paul
points out her vulnerability here.

(3) She needs authority to prevent that deception. Since Paul states the
reason for the necessity of authority over the woman, see how ludicrous
it comes out if you take this as a literal head-covering: ‘Since the
woman is vulnerable to the fallen angels, she needs a veil or
head-covering.’ This will save no woman! Ever!

Verses 11 and 12 seem to mitigate the requirement, but instead they
strengthen it. Now through childbirth the woman can have authority over
a man; at least while he is a child. She can perpetuate the gentleness
of men toward her fairer sex by means of raising male children in the
right way, teaching them to respect womanhood and giving them something
to respect.

Paul comes to an intermediate conclusion in verse 13: “Judge for
yourselves in this: is it fitting for a woman to pray uncovered before
God?”

In verse fourteen Paul illustrates from nature: long hair looks
beautiful on a woman; because a woman’s hair is significantly different
from a man’s.

(1) And he says that long hair is dishonor to a man, but glory to a
woman.

(2) This does indeed set the general standard for hair length; a man’s
hair must be generally short and a woman’s generally long. There is
plenty of room for individualism within this guideline.

(a) A man wears his hair short in order to demonstrate his rulership
over nature and authority over the woman.

(b) A woman wear her hair long in order to demonstrate her humility to
her man.

kp Now if anyone presumes to be contentious, we do not have such a
practice, nor do the churches of God.

(1) Here Paul expresses the final word of authority on the matter. If
you disagree, no one has such a practice.

(2) In other words, neither Paul personally, nor none of the churches
have a different practice from what was stated in the passage.

(3) In other words, if you disagree, tough. No one is going to go with
you in the matter.

The Biblical concept of blessing (see separate doctrine).

And all ate and were satisfied, and since they were filled, He says to
His disciples, ‘Gather the excess fragments, that nothing might be
destroyed.’ Therefore they gathered and they filled twelve baskets of
fragments from the five loaves of barley which were left over by the
ones who had eaten, and also from the fish.

All ate and were satisfied, the second detail being important in light
of how many people were there.

Matthew 14:20 uses ECHORTASTHESAN means to eat your fill or be satisfied
by eating.

The people ate and gained not only nutritional satisfaction, but also
psychological. That is, they felt full.

In fact compare this with Revelation 19:21, “And the rest were killed
with the sword which came from the mouth of Him who sat on the horse,
and all the birds were filled with their flesh.” You can see the intent
of the writer here. There was so much flesh that all the birds were
filled with it.

This was indeed a miracle. Five loaves and two fish might be enough for
ten people to eat and gain some satisfaction, but comes nowhere close to
feeding one thousand times the same number.

This satisfaction is intended as a symbol.

It is the symbol of satisfaction for eating of the bread of life, the
word of God.

It is the symbol of the conditions of the kingdom of God. That is, the
millennial kingdom of Jesus Christ.

You see, in the history of the world, there has always been famine and
poverty; hunger has always been present among the nations of the world.

War also ravages the face of the earth. Yet here is Christ demonstrating
that where there is only a little food, it is enough for thousands to
eat to satisfaction. This will be the nature of His kingdom.

The millennium.

(1) Introduction.

(a) The millennium is a future 1000 year dispensation that is
characterized by perfect environment.

(b) The Bible has many predictions about the millennium - there is a
fair amount of information on the subject.

(c) The millennium has not yet occurred - there is absolutely no
historical evidence that would support the theorem that the millennium
has already occurred.

· A period of 1000 years of peace and prosperity would have surely been
documented.

· Logically, the millennium can only be in the future. Christ could not
have returned yet, nor could he have brought in the millennium before he
was born.

(d) The Bible unequivocally portrays the millennium as a real event in
the future history of planet earth.

· There is no credence to the argument that there will never be a
millennium and that world history simply goes into the eternal state.

· Neither is there any indication that the millennium is only a
metaphor.

(2) It is impossible for mankind to bring in the millennium through his
own strength.

(a) It is crystal clear from the Revelation passages that the millennium
comes as the result of the second advent. Revelation 19:11-20:6 lays out
the sequence of events so that there can be no mistake. “(11) Then I saw
heaven opened, and behold, a white horse! He who sat upon it is called
Faithful and True, and in righteousness he judges and makes war. (12)
His eyes are like a flame of fire, and on his head are many diadems; and
he has a name inscribed which no one knows but himself. (13) He is clad
in a robe dipped in blood, and the name by which he is called is The
Word of God. (14) And the armies of heaven, arrayed in fine linen, white
and pure, followed him on white horses. (15) From his mouth issues a
sharp sword with which to smite the nations, and he will rule them with
a rod of iron; he will tread the wine press of the fury of the wrath of
God the Almighty. (16) On his robe and on his thigh he has a name
inscribed, King of kings and Lord of lords. (17) Then I saw an angel
standing in the sun, and with a loud voice he called to all the birds
that fly in mid-heaven, ‘Come, gather for the great supper of God, (18)
to eat the flesh of kings, the flesh of captains, the flesh of mighty
men, the flesh of horses and their riders, and the flesh of all men,
both free and slave, both small and great.’ (19) And I saw the beast and
the kings of the earth with their armies gathered to make war against
him who sits upon the horse and against his army. (20) And the beast was
captured, and with it the false prophet who in its presence had worked
the signs by which he deceived those who had received the mark of the
beast and those who worshiped its image. These two were thrown alive
into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur. (21) And the rest were
slain by the sword of him who sits upon the horse, the sword that issues
from his mouth; and all the birds were gorged with their flesh. (20:1)
Then I saw an angel coming down from heaven, holding in his hand the key
of the bottomless pit and a great chain. (2) And he seized the dragon,
that ancient serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a
thousand years, (3) and threw him into the pit, and shut it and sealed
it over him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the
thousand years were ended. After that he must be loosed for a little
while. (4) Then I saw thrones, and seated on them were those to whom
judgment was committed. Also I saw the souls of those who had been
beheaded for their testimony to Jesus and for the word of God, and who
had not worshiped the beast or its image and had not received its mark
on their foreheads or their hands. They came to life, and reigned with
Christ a thousand years. (5) The rest of the dead did not come to life
until the thousand years were ended. This is the first resurrection. (6)
Blessed and holy is he who shares in the first resurrection! Over such
the second death has no power, but they shall be priests of God and of
Christ, and they shall reign with him a thousand years.”

(b) Humanity is totally incapable of bringing in a millennium.

· We do not have the mental capacity to do so - even with computers we
are no better off.

· As long as the devil is in the world, he is well able to outsmart any
human group that relies on their own wits.

· And think: the devil has been trying to bring in his own millennium
for more than ten thousand years, and he has miserably failed. If he
cannot do this with his superior intellect, then how can we?

(c) Without the visible leadership of Christ, even believers are
incapable of administrating the entire world into a perfect environment.

(3) The advent of the millennium was delayed by the rejection of Christ
and His kingdom by the Jews during the first advent.

(4) The environment of the millennium.

(a) The millennium will provide a perfect environment, for three main
reasons:

· The whole earth is under the leadership of Jesus Christ.

· All the fallen angels are placed into prison under the earth.

· The earth is populated only by believers in Jesus Christ.

- The baptism of fire removes all unbelievers - this occurs at the
second advent. Ezekiel 20:34-38, “(34) I will bring you out from the
peoples and gather you out of the countries where you are scattered,
with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, and with wrath poured out;
(35) and I will bring you into the wilderness of the peoples, and there
I will enter into judgment with you face to face. (36) As I entered into
judgment with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so I
will enter into judgment with you, says the Lord GOD. (37) I will make
you pass under the rod, and I will let you go in by number. (38) I will
purge out the rebels from among you, and those who transgress against
me; I will bring them out of the land where they sojourn, but they shall
not enter the land of Israel. Then you will know that I am the Lord.”
See also Matthew 25:31-46

- Only 144,000 Jewish believers remain - Revelation 14.

(b) The perfect environment means the following:

· Ideal spiritual environment.

- The best environment possible for evangelism and spiritual growth -
visible and glorified Christ ruling in perfect environment.

- This does not mean that there will be no unbelievers. Some may even
grow up in this perfect environment and reject Him. Volition will
continue to function in both positive and negative ways.

- Added to this will be universal knowledge of God, Isaiah 11:9, “They
shall not hurt or destroy in all my holy mountain; for the earth shall
be full of the knowledge of the LORD as the waters cover the sea.”

- Incredible spirituality with an even greater outpouring of the
ministry of God the Holy Spirit - far greater than ever before. Joel
2:28-29, “(28) And it will come about after this that I will pour out My
Spirit on all mankind; and your sons and daughters will prophesy, your
old men will dream dreams, your young men will see visions, and even on
the male and female servants I will pour out My Spirit in those days.

· Wonderful family life as the keystone to a one world government under
the laws of Divine Establishment.

· Perfect establishment justice through the great judge, Jesus Christ,
and His delegated authorities, church age believers.

- Isaiah 2:4, “And he will judge between the nations, and will render
decisions for many peoples; and they will hammer their swords into
plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation will not lift up
sword against nation, and never again will they learn war.”

- Isaiah 11:1-2, “(1)Then a shoot will spring from the stem of Jesse,
and a branch from his roots will bear fruit. (2) And the Spirit of the
Lord will rest on Him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding. The
Spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge and the fear of
the Lord.”

- 2 Timothy 2:12, “If we endure we will also reign with Him.”

- Revelation 2:25-27, “(25) nevertheless what you have, hold fast until
I come. (26) And he who overcomes, and he who keeps My deeds until the
end, to him I will give authority over the nations; (27) and he shall
rule them with a rod of iron, as the vessels of the potter are broken to
pieces, as I also have received authority from My Father.”

- Revelation 3:21, “He who overcomes, I will grant to him to sit down
with Me on My throne, as I also overcame and sat down with My Father on
His throne.”

- Revelation 5:10, “You have mad them to be a kingdom and priests to our
God; and they will reign upon the earth.”

- Revelation 20:4,6: “(4) Then I saw thrones, and they sat on them, and
judgment was given to them. And I saw the souls of those who had been
beheaded because of their testimony of Jesus and because of the word of
God, and those who had not worshiped the beast or his image, and had not
received the mark on their forehead and on their hand; and they came to
life and reigned with Christ… (6) Blessed and holy is the one who has a
part in the first resurrection; over these the second death has no
power, but they will be priests of God and of Christ and will reign with
Him for a thousand years.”

· Universal peace

- Psalm 46:9, “He makes wars to cease to the end of the earth; He breaks
the bow and cuts the spear in two; He burns the chariots with fire.”

- Isaiah 2:3, “And many peoples will come and say, ‘Come, let us go up
to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; that he
may teach us concerning His ways and that we may walk in His paths.’ For
the law will go forth from Zion and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem.”

- Hosea 2:18, “In that day I will also make a covenant for them. With
the beasts of the field, the birds of the sky, and the creeping things
of the ground. And I will abolish the bow, the sword and war from the
land, and I will make them lie down in safety.”

- Micah 4:3, “And He will judge between many peoples and render
decisions for mighty, distant nations. Then they will hammer their
swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks; nations will
not lift up sword against nation, and never again will they train for
war.”

· Universal prosperity, Psalm72:7,16. “(7) In his days may the righteous
flourish, and abundance of peace till the moon is no more… (16) May
there be abundance of grain in the earth on top of the mountains; its
fruit will wave like the cedars of Lebanon; and may those from the city
flourish like vegetation of the earth.”

· Longevity will once again become common. Isaiah 65:20, “No longer will
there be in it an infant who lives but a few days, or an old man who
does not live out his days; for the youth will die at the age of one
hundred and the one who does not reach the age of one hundred shall be
thought accursed.”

· No handicaps, Isaiah 35:5-6, “(5) Then the eyes of the blind will be
opened and the ears of the deaf will be unstopped. (6) Then the lame
will leap like a deer, and the tongue of the mute will shout for joy.”

· Nature will return to its pristine state.

- Romans 8:19-22, “(19) For the anxious longing of the creation waits
eagerly for the revealing of the sons of God. (20) For the creation was
subjected to futility, not of its own will, but because of Him who
subjected it, in hope (21) that the creation itself also will be set
free from its slavery to corruption into the freedom of the glory of the
children of God. (22) For we know that the whole creation groans and
suffers the pains of childbirth together until now.”

- Isaiah 11:6-8, “(6) And the wolf will dwell with the lamb, and the
leopard will lie down with the young goat, and the calf and the young
lion and the fatling together; and a little boy will lead them. (7) Also
the cow and the bear will graze, their young will lie down together, and
the lion will eat straw like the ox. (8) The nursing child will play by
the hole of the cobra, and the weaned child will put his hand on the
viper’s den.”

- Isaiah 35:1-2,7: “(1) The wilderness and the desert will be glad, and
the Arabah will rejoice and blossom; like the crocus (2) it will blossom
profusely and rejoice with rejoicing and shout of joy. The glory of
Lebanon will be given to it, the majesty of Carmel and Sharon. They will
see the glory of the Lord, the majesty of our God… (7) The scorched land
will become a pool and the thirsty ground springs of water; in the haunt
of jackals, its resting place, grass becomes reeds and rushes.”

- Isaiah 65:25, “‘The wolf and the lamb will graze together, and the
lion will eat straw like the ox; and dust will be the serpent’s food.
They will do no evil or harm in all My holy mountain,’ says the Lord.”

· And all this in spite of man being sinful - yes, still sinful. The
human body will remain the same in that the sin nature is transmitted,
and babies are still born spiritually dead.

(c) The people of the millennium.

· The millennium begins with the 144,000 surviving Jews who were the
remnant of the tribulation,

- Isaiah 10:20-22, “(20) Now in that day the remnant of Israel, and
those of the house of Jacob who have escaped, will never again rely on
the one who struck them, but will truly rely on the Lord, the Holy One
of Israel. (21) A remnant will return, the remnant of Jacob, to the
mighty God. (22) For though your people, O Israel, may be like the sand
of the sea, only a remnant within them will return; a destruction is
determined, overflowing with righteousness.”

- Isaiah 11:11-12, “(11) Then it will happen on that day that the Lord
will again recover the second time with His hand the remnant of His
people, who will remain, from Assyria, Egypt, Pathros, Cush, Elam,
Shinar, Hamath, and from the islands of the sea. (12) And He will lift
up a standard for the nations and assemble the banished ones of Israel,
and will gather the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the
earth.”

- This reestablishes Israel as God’s client nation and they function as
originally intended.

· The ruler of the millennium will be Jesus Christ.

· All of the fallen angels spend the millennium locked in the prison of
Tartarus, Rev 20:1-3, “(1) Then I saw an angel coming down from heaven,
holding the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand. (2) And he
laid hold of the dragon, the serpent of old, who is the devil and Satan,
and bound him for a thousand years; (3) and he threw him into the abyss,
and shut it and sealed it over him, so that he would not deceive the
nations any longer, until the thousand years were completed; after these
things he must be released for a short time.”

(d) The purpose of the millennium.

· The purpose of the millennium is to prove once and for all that when
God rules, perfect environment ensues.

· The millennium is God’s final argument in the angelic conflict.

· The millennium shows, once and for all, that God was just to the
fallen angels in eternity past when He passed judgment on them.

- They had no cause to rebel under the just and perfect prehistoric
rulership of God.

- Even when they did rebel, God dealt with them justly and doubt offered
them grace in spite of their rebellion.

- The millennium is the greatest display of all of God’s grace.

(e) The end of the millennium is marred by the Gog and Magog revolution,
Revelation 20:7-10. This violent attempt at the overthrow of God’s
government ends with the final judgment. The eternal state ensues.

Therefore the men seeing what sign He performed were saying, ‘He is
truly the prophet who is coming into the world.’ Therefore Jesus after
knowing that they are about to come and seize Him in order to make Him
king, He immediately ordered the disciples to embark into the boat and
to precede Him to the other side to Bethsaida, until what time He might
release the crowds. And after releasing the crowds He went up onto the
mountain by Himself to pray. And after evening came He was alone there.”

The prophet who is coming into the world is a messiah reference. If your
memory is sharp, you will recall this same appellation from John the
Baptist’s inquiry. “Are you the coming one, or should we expect
another?”

The men saw His sign - the sign of the bread, and they decided that
Christ was indeed the Messiah.

It is John alone who recalls this distinction in his gospel.

The aorist participle IDONTES tells us that two things happen in
sequence. The crowd sees Christ perform this miracle, and then they make
their conclusion.

They saw and then concluded that He was the Messiah.

From all the previous miracles this was not so.

From changing the water into wine until the present there is no
‘Messiah’ movement for Christ.

Has there been a dramatic change in their attitude and world perception?
It seems not, from Christ’s reaction.

Jesus figures out that they are about to come and seize Him in order to
make Him king.

The aorist participle GNOUS implies that Jesus did some thinking in
order to perceive their intent. The aorist tense participle shows
antecedent action to the main verb, just like IDONTES above.

So the crowd thinks about the miracle, and then they perceive that
Christ is the Messiah.

Then Christ thinks about the crowd, and then He perceives that they are
about to seize Him in order to make Him king.

He figures this to be a bad thing, and acts with immediate action.

He orders the disciples to immediately get into the boat for the purpose
of flight to the Bethsaida side of the Sea.

What gives here? Isn’t Messiahship the point? Isn’t this exactly the
goal? Well, I would say that it depends on the people you are going to
rule.

Christ identifies the motive of this crowd in John 6:26, “‘Truly truly I
say to you, you seek Me not because you saw signs, but because you ate
from the bread and you were satisfied.”

Their motive is frivolous. They want to eat. They see Jesus as their
meal ticket.

In our time, our hard work is not directly related to our provision of
food, because we are by and large not farmers.

But in the time of Christ, a good chunk of the people had to farm, and
it was hard, sometimes even backbreaking work. It was before the John
Deere tractor era, remember.

As a result of this, the provision of an abundance of free food would
certainly be a boon. Few people had other bills to pay. No phone, no
electricity, no gas, no water, no waste disposal. Just taxes and food,
and a few sundry other items like clothing.

This crowd had identified that their toil on this earth was finished,
thanks to this miracle. If He could do this once, He could do it again.

Now they recognize Christ as a provider, but their acceptance of this
logistical supply does not mean in any way that they had accepted the
spiritual creed of the Kingdom.

Christ does not want just anyone. He wants people for their beliefs, not
for their desires.

So this definitely represents a twist of negative volition. They wanted
Christ as king for the wrong reason.

Some reflections:

In a nation, you can have a great constitution, and still be degenerate,
thanks to the weakness of the people.

You can have a great king or president, and if the people are weak and
degenerate, the nation is nothing.

In any organization, the weakness of the masses will overcome the
goodness of the leadership.

The issue of motivation becomes paramount.

(1) Christ’s Galileans were motivated by their laziness, and by their
desire for easy logistics. They were motivated by their stimulation
lust, always wanting to see a miracle, but never really seeing its
significance, even when it is painfully obvious.

(2) They lack the pure motivation of personal love for God. They lack
the initiative and discipline which leads to spiritual momentum.

This cross-applies to church ministries.

(1) In an effort to build up membership, church leaders often resort to
extraneous motivational techniques.

(a) They work from the social angle, or from the entertainment angle, in
order to produce numbers in membership and attendance.

(b) But then the reason that the crowds are there is completely wrong.

(2) A church full of people who need to be entertained, and who accept
the social life over the spiritual life is a bad church. People who are
there for the wrong reasons are a distraction to the others who have
their priorities straight.

(a) Bad people love society too.

(b) Bad people love entertainment too.

(c) But bad people universally hate the truth.

(d) You can keep bad people away simply by teaching the truth all the
time.

(3) There is a right reason to belong to a local assembly of believers.
Spiritual growth unto spiritual maturity.

(4) In the course of obtaining the objective, you may of course enjoy
the society of other believers; you may also partake in various forms of
virtuous entertainment, so long as your priorities remain.

(5) This does not mean that the church is only for mature believers. On
the contrary, it is for believers of all stages of spiritual growth. But
the people of the church are all to share the same priority: development
of personal love for God through the intake and application of God’s
word.

This also stands as a refutation to the missionary credo that you must
take care of a person’s basic needs before you can give them the gospel.

(1) Many mission efforts go toward feeding people so that they will
listen to the word.

(2) A starving man who is honest about his spiritual standing will love
the gospel. A fat and full man who is not will reject it.

(3) There is no immediate connection between basic needs and the gospel.

(4) This should stand as no discouragement toward charity.

(5) Christian charity is an effort to meet the basic needs of starving
people to keep them alive.

(6) Keeping a person alive is a good thing, because it extends their
opportunity to hear and receive the gospel.

This analysis of Christ also has important ramifications for any
political body during the church age.

(1) It comes down to the people. Why? If the greatest ruler in the world
rejected a ruling offer from His own people, then we can certainly
conclude that the people are important.

(2) The king or ruler(s) is most often a reflection of the people.

(3) The greatest ruler of all times, the King of kings and Lord of
lords, Jesus Christ - He rejected this opportunity because of the
people.

It is important now to make some proper distinctions between the kingdom
of Jesus Christ then and now.

(1) In the gospel records the proclamation of the Kingdom was
inseparably connected with its King.

(a) The good news of the Kingdom was announced to Israel alone.

(b) This preaching of the Kingdom to Israel laid upon that chosen nation
the demand for a decision.

(c) The ministry of Christ and His message of the Kingdom met with
opposition from the very beginning.

(d) This tide of opposition toward our Lord’s good news of the Kingdom
grew steadily to a definite crisis. First, reference is made to those
who were nearest to Him. Second, the attitude of the people in General
is described… Third, and most important, there came a definite crisis of
opposition on the part of the religious leaders of Israel.

(e) What has been said above, of course, will raise the problem of
contingency.

(2) After He made that offer clear, the people of Israel rejected it,
and in fact demanded and got His death. They rejected the offer for the
following reasons:

(a) The high spiritual requirements our Lord laid down as essential for
entrance into the kingdom.

· The Sermon on the Mount established a spiritual code and an
establishment code.

- Christ revealed the spiritual code in the beatitudes.

- Much of what follows the spiritual code is the establishment code.

· The offer of Christ was this: that if they would live according to the
spiritual and establishment code of the Kingdom, He would give to them
millennial conditions.

(b) He therefore refused to establish a kingdom merely social and
political in character.

(c) His denunciation of the current religion with its traditionalism,
legalism, and ritualism Luke 11:37-54, “(37)Now when he had spoken, a
Pharisee asked Him to have lunch with him; and He went in, and reclined
at the table. (38) When the Pharisee saw it, he was surprised that He
had not first ceremonially washed before the meal. (39) But the Lord
said to him, ‘Now you Pharisees clean the outside of the cup and of the
platter; but inside of you, you are full of robbery and wickedness. (40)
You foolish ones, did not He who made the outside make the inside also?
(41) But give that which is within as charity, and then all things are
clean for you. (42) But woe to you Pharisees! For you pay tithe of mint
and rue and every kind of garden herb, and yet disregard justice and the
love of God; but these are the things you should have done without
neglecting the others. (43) Woe to you Pharisees! For you love the chief
seats in the synagogues and the respectful greetings in the market
places. (44) Woe to you! For you are like concealed tombs, and the
people who walk over them are unaware of it.’ (45) One of the lawyers
said to Him in reply, ‘Teacher, when You say this, You insult us too.’
(46) But He said, ‘Woe to you lawyers as well! For you weigh men down
with burdens hard to bear, while you yourselves will not even touch the
burdens with one of your fingers. (47) Woe to you! For you build the
tombs of the prophets, and it was your fathers who killed them. (48) So
you are witnesses and approve the deeds of your fathers; because it was
they who killed them, and you build their tombs. (49) For this reason
also the wisdom of God said, ‘I will send to them prophets and apostles,
and some of them they will kill and some they will persecute, (50) so
that the blood of all the prophets, shed since the foundation of the
world, may be charged against this generation, (51) from the blood of
Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who was killed between the altar and the
house of God; yes, I tell you, it shall be charged against this
generation. (52) Woe to you lawyers! For you have taken away the key of
knowledge; you yourselves did not enter, and you hindered those who were
entering.’ (53) When He left there, the scribes and the Pharisees began
to be very hostile and to question Him closely on many subjects, (54)
plotting against Him to catch Him in something He might say.”

(d) His scathing arraignment of the ruling classes (Matt 23).

(e) His association with and compassion for the outcasts of Israel (Matt
9:10-13; Lk 15:1,2).

(f) His exalted claims for Himself (John 5:16-18; 10:24-33; 18:37).

(3) Because of this, the earthly millennial kingdom was placed on hold,
and a new dispensation began.

(a) The church age is that dispensation. It is designed to develop
co-rulers for Jesus Christ. It has a special plan for that development
that makes it unique from the other dispensations as far as spiritual
growth is concerned. 2 Tim. 2:12, “If we endure, we shall also reign
with Him.”

(b) Church age believers have their citizenship from the kingdom of
heaven, but they are currently living in the devil’s world, Php 3:20,
“For our citizenship is in heaven, from which also we eagerly wait for a
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.”

(c) It is the role of the church believer to represent their home nation
before others in a foreign country. It is not their role to take over
that foreign country.

(d) Church age believers are therefore ambassadors, but not yet rulers,
2 Cor 5:20.

10. Jesus’ response to this effort: “He immediately ordered the
disciples to embark into the boat and to precede Him to the other side
to Bethsaida, until what time He might release the crowds. And after
releasing the crowds He went up onto the mountain by Himself to pray.
And after evening came He was alone there.”

Christ had to get away from these ill-motived people. He gives immediate
orders.

He is very eager to get the disciples away from these people, and also
Himself. But He first takes responsibility for the crowd.

By staying with the crowd, Christ gives His disciples time to get away
to Bethsaida, to the east.

He knew that they would stay with Him after the miracle of the bread and
fish.

And He went up onto the mountain by Himself to pray.

(1) Jesus Christ is under stress here! He is a man, and this event
represents a disappointment.

(2) The greatest stress relief of all time is the prayer, and here our
Lord turns to His Father in heaven.

(3) This is a bit of fancy, but the prayer was certainly like this: “My
Father who is in heaven; let Your name be sanctified; let Your kingdom
come; let Your will become, as in heaven so upon earth; give to us today
our logistical bread, and forgive us our debts as we ourselves also
forgave our debtors; and do not bring us into testing, but save us from
the evil.”

(a) For this prayer remained the desire of Christ’s heart, regardless of
the two years of disappointment.

(b) The crowd had done everything wrong for two years, and this is a
culmination.

(4) Yet this was a test, and Christ had to endure.

(5) So Christ was alone on the mountain that night, talking with God the
Father.

(6) This was a rare and precious occasion in the life of Christ.
