---
title: Music
layout: lesson
---


**Music**

Christian Music

The hymn *Break Thou the Bread of Life* was written by Mary Lathbury
while she attended the Chautauqua Summer School and religious resort in
New York. She had been asked to write two hymns for the school and this
was one of them. The Scriptural basis for her hymn was Matt. 14:19; John
8:32; John 6:35, and Matt. 5:6.

Several Bible doctrines are prominent in this hymn. First, the doctrine
of the Word of God and the spiritual bread of life is seen in the first
verse. In verse 2, the Word of God is the Absolute Truth. In verse 3 is
expressed the believer’s love for the Word.

The hymn describes how a Christian experiences great peace when
partaking of the Truth, and reveals a thirst for greater truths and deep
desires and emotions within the soul.

The Bible and Music

The Bible deals extensively with the subject of music. In both the Old
Testament and New Testament, music played an important part in spiritual
worship and was widely used in teaching doctrinal truth to believers.

There are three types of songs in the Bible; Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs.

The word “psalm” comes from the Greek word  (**psalmos**), and
refers to a Psalm from the Old Testament. Its meaning is derived from
the idea of twanging a string on a musical instrument so that it
vibrates, hence, it means “to play on a stringed instrument.” In the New
Testament, the verb  (**psallo**) it means to sing a hymn, to
celebrate the praises of God.

The word “hymn” is from ‘ (**humnos**) meaning “a song of praise to
God.” Spiritual songs,  (**pneumatikos ode**) are songs
that praise, exhort, challenge warn, in the context of the ministry of
the Holy Spirit along with the spirit of the Christian believer. The
Greek word **ode**, from which the English word “ode” comes, refers to
any type of song, a battle song, a harvest song, a festival song, etc.
So the term “spiritual” is added in the Bible to limit the type of song
used in Christian worship.

1 Cor. 14:12-16, So also you, since you are zealous of spiritual
{gifts,} seek to abound for the edification of the church.

Therefore let one who speaks in a tongue pray that he may interpret.

For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my mind is unfruitful.

What is {the outcome} then? I shall pray with the spirit and I shall
pray with the mind also; I shall sing (**psallo**) with the spirit and I
shall sing (**psallo**) with the mind also.

Otherwise if you bless in the spirit {only,} how will the one who fills
the place of the ungifted say the “Amen” at your giving of thanks, since
he does not know what you are saying?

Note in these verses that the singing is a key ingredient in the
ministry of edification, and that it is just as unfruitful to sing
without content as it is to speak in tongues to someone who does not
understand, since “he does not know what you are saying (singing).”

Singing in the Local Church

There are two major passages in the New Testament dealing with singing:
Eph. 5:14-21 and Col. 3:12-17.

The overall context of Ephesians establishes the following:

Chapter 1 - the truth about the union of a believer with the Lord Jesus
Christ

Chapter 2 - Freedom from the Old Testament position of estrangement from
Christ.

Chapter 3 - The believer in relation to his own advancement in the
Christian life.

Chapter 4 - The believer in relation to the Body of Christ as a whole.

Chapter 5 - The believer’s relationship to the body in the local church.

Chapter 6 – The believer’s social relationships and the protection of
the armor of God.

In Eph. 5:1-17, the walk of the believer is dealt with, and the
spiritual condition of the believer is made paramount (5:18).

Verse 5:19 refers to the spiritual expression of the believer who is
growing in Christ and filled with the Holy Spirit. Singing is the soul
expression of the Christian, who sings in association with other
like-minded people. He sings psalms, which are the Old Testament songs.
He sing hymns, songs of praise to God. He sings spiritual songs, songs
directed to people that praise, exhort, challenge, warn.

In Colossians, the context of chapters 1 and 2 is that we are complete
in Christ, and chapter 3 deals with the overt walk of the believer.

Col. 3:12-15 describes the relationship of believers with each other.
Verse 3:16 describes the believer with doctrine (3:16a) expressing that
doctrine by teaching, admonishing, and singing with grace (psalms,
hymns, spiritual songs). Verse 3:17 shows the overall motive and purpose
for all activity.

In both of these passages singing is the expression of Christians in a
local church and has certain characteristics.

• The person singing is a mature believer, filled with the Holy Spirit
(Eph. 5:18).

• Singing is preceded by “the word of Christ dwelling in you richly”
(Col. 3), Bible truth in the soul

• In Eph. 5 singing is an expression of the soul toward God, and the
emphasis is on the proper attitude of the soul

• In Col. 3, the singing is an expression of doctrine in the soul
expressed toward other people who benefit from it.

• In Col. 3:16, we see the two things that singing accomplishes with
respect to other believers in the congregation. It is a teaching tool,
and it is an admonishing tool.

• Therefore, singing is used for praise to God, teaching of each other,
and warning, encouraging, or exhorting each other.

• In both passages, singing is done “unto the Lord”; although it will
benefit the congregation, the Lord will be glorified.

It is very important, as well, to point out what Christian singing **is
not**.

• Singing is not the measure of the spirituality of vigor of a local
church. The filling of the Spirit is necessary for proper singing; but
singing is no proof of the filling of the Spirit.

• Singing in a local congregation is not designed to be used to create a
mood for the soul. It is rather an expression of the mental attitude of
the soul created by applied Bible truth in a believer who is filled with
the Spirit, occupied with Christ, living in the Word.

• Singing is not measured by the amount of zeal employed, but by the
understanding that accompanies it. (See above 1 Cor. 14:15).

• Spiritual singing is not designed to give a Christian a good feeling.
If it is praise, then it is directed to God. If it is teaching, it is
designed for learning. If it is admonishment, it is designed for
warning, comfort, challenge, motivation, etc.

• Singing is not the primary function in a worship service. Spirituality
and doctrine are the primary issues.

• Singing is not an adequate motive for attending church. The teaching
of the Word of God is the only thing that makes singing either valid or
meaningful.

The History of Modern Hymns

Hymns, or odes, have been known from the beginning of written history. A
tablet dating 800 BC contains a Sumerian hymn about the creation.

A large number of Christian hymns, some still used today, were written
by such early Church Fathers as John of Damascus and Ambrose of Milan.
Toward the end of the Middle Ages there again arose a demand for
congregational singing, first expressed in spiritual songs and carols.
During the Renaissance (1501), the first recognized modern hymn was
published at Prague for the Moravian Brethren.

Martin Luther and his followers created a large body of chorales which
rank among the finest of congregational hymns today. Under John Calvin
at Geneva, the musical reformation developed hymns based on metrical
paraphrases of the Psalms, prepared in French and later translated into
German for the Reformed Church in Germany.

In England, the hymns of the congregations were limited almost entirely
to Psalms prepared by Thomas Steinhold and John Hopkins from 1549 to
1562. These continued to be the most important body of English hymns
until about 1696.

Evangelical hymnology began at the end of the 17th Century. In the
Lutheran Church, the Pietist movement started a new wave of hymn
writing. In England, John and Charles Wesley began to write what later
became the most popular hymns in the English language.

John Wesley’s first *Collection of Psalms and Hymns*was published in
1737 in Charlestown, South Carolina. His brother Charles wrote more than
6,500 hymns.

Isaac Watts, another English hymn writer of about the same period, wrote
*Hymns and Spiritual Songs* (1707 to 1709) and has been called the
creator of the modern English hymn.

Reformation hymns were written with no particular tune in mind. A
musician would write music that would fit the meter of the words being
sung, and the tunes given to the lyrics were themselves given certain
names and designations.

The common ingredient to all hymns of the Reformation churches and the
Christian churches that followed was that all hymns were either actual
Bible passages or paraphrases of Bible passages.

Descriptions of Some Familiar Hymns

Are You Weary, Heavy Laden

Background: Written by Stephen the Sabaite, a nephew to John of
Damascus. John had been tutored by a slave who had later been freed, and
both retired to a monastery in the wilderness of Judea. Stephen was
taken with them to the monastery, and after the death of his uncle and
the slave, Stephen wrote this hymn. It was later recreated by Dr. Neale
in 1862 combining the experience of Stephen and himself in the sons.

Doctrines portrayed:

• Eternal rest given by Christ

• Sufferings of Christ portrayed

• Kingship of Christ

• Acceptance of Christ

• Blessings of Christ

Applications: Comfort and fellowship because of the undeserved suffering
of Christ. It is a hymn of praise.

Scriptural Basis: Matt. 11:28; John 6:39; Mark 13:31.

Beneath the Cross of Jesus

Background: Written by Elizabeth Clephane near the end of her life in
1869. She had a glimpse of her eternal future in a better land and could
imagine her footprints leading to that better goal (Dying Grace
concept).

Doctrine:

• Christ, the Rock of salvation in a weary land of sin

• The sufferings of Christ for sins

• Unworthiness of man (Grace)

• Blessings received from the death of Christ

• Eternal love of God

Scripture basis: Matt. 27:36

Blest Be The Tie That Binds

Background: This hymn was written by John Fawcett who was a pastor in a
small Yorkshire village. He was planning to leave his small church and
take a larger and wealthier church in London. But he and his wife could
not bear to leave the people who were so close to them. So they stayed,
and Fawcett wrote this hymn as an expression of the love of the
brethren.

Doctrine:

• Christian Love, verse 1

• Prayer, verse 2

• Responsibilities within the Body, verse 3

• Doctrine of Goodbyes and Hellos, verse 4

Scripture: 1 John 1:7; John 13:34,35

Breathe On Me, Breath of God

Background: Written by Edwin Hatch in 1886. He wrote from his soul what
he imagined that the disciples in the Upper Room had felt when Jesus was
speaking to them; he thought that Christ at that time breathed the Holy
Spirit on them.

Doctrine: The following doctrinal errors are apparent in this song.

• We do not have to ask for the Holy Spirit. The Spirit indwells us
permanently from the moment of salvation. The Spirit fills us upon
condition of our confession of sin.

• The song refers to the filling of the Spirit, but the principle of
confession is not mentioned.

• The concept of the cleansing of the Holy Spirit at confession is
confused with the process of edification (Verse 2)

• The issue of outward production in Christianity is confused in verse 3
with the concept of fiery manifestations which showed up only on the Day
of Pentecost.

• The song puts the sealing ministry of the Holy Spirit as something in
the future (verse 4), so it lacks emphasis on the assurance of the
believer as having possession of eternal life (see Ephesians 1:13,14)

Christ the Lord is Risen Today

Background: Written by Charles Wesley out of a desire to elevate man’s
thinking by the inspiration of poetry. The message is doctrinal
application and reveals a sense of victory and assurance which we do not
always see in Wesley’s somewhat somber background.

Doctrines:

• Christ’s resurrection calls for men and angels to rejoice

• Death of Christ on the Cross is evidence of His love and that He has
won the battle. His resurrection overcame death and provides a release
for Old Testament saints. This is correct if it is understood that this
release occurs just preceding the Millennial reign of Christ.

• Christ as the King, alive, died once for salvation.

• Salvation is for all who believer (Although Wesley apparently did not
believer in universal salvation.)

Scripture: 1 Cor. 15:55-57

Come, Thou Almighty King

Background: Authorship attributed to Charles Wesley, but real author is
unknown. During Revolutionary War days, it was introduced in a Long
Island, NY, church by a group of American patriots when a band of
British soldiers demanded that the congregation sing “God Save the
King.” Instead, the church sang “Come, Thou Almighty King.”

Doctrines:

• Sovereignty of God the Father and the Kingship of Christ, verse 1

• Incarnation of Christ, verse 2

• Holy Spirit, verse 3

• Doctrine of the Trinity, verse 4

Application: This is a true devotional hymn, well balanced to render
worship, praise, and self exhortation. It is a prayer of the heart that
the three persons of the Godhead may exercise control on the one who is
singing, that he may be able to praise God in fullness.

Scripture: Psalm 51:15

Crown Him With Many Crowns

Background: Written by Matthew Bridges when he and a group of others
left the Church of England and joined Roman Catholicism. The original
title was *The Song of the Seraphs*, one of the poems found in a volume
called *The Passions of Jesus.*

Doctrines:

• Verse 1: kingship of Jesus Christ in eternity; the crowning of Christ,
victorious and ruling; Jesus Christ as the Lamb of God

• Verse 2: Christ, the son of God in eternity past; Christ, the son of
man in time; Christ the faithful high priest

• Verse 3: Christ, the resurrected one; Christ, the one who conquered
death of us

• Verse 4: Christ, in a human body, yet glorified; Christ the eternal
one worthy of praise for all eternity

Scripture: Rev. 19:12

Dear Lord and Father of Mankind

Background: Written by John Greanleaf Whittier in 1872, the setting of
this song is actually another poem, *The Brewing of Soma*, referring to
the brewing of a terrible storm. Whittier wrote this hymn in contrast to
the great tumult and destruction of such a storm. It reveals the deep
calm and peace which stills the souls of those who hear the message of
the Gospel and respond to it in faith.

Doctrine: Bible doctrines are not clearly portrayed in this song…

• The doctrine of the Fatherhood of God is not clear in verse 1.

• The doctrine of forgiveness is not correctly described. It is
portrayed as being asked for rather than as a result of confession of
sin.

• Doctrines of Faith and Obedience are weakly alluded to in verse 2.

• Doctrines of Peace, Stability, Depression are expressed in a general
way in verse 3.

• Misuse of the concept of prayer in verse 4 asking God to manifest some
overt expression to teach spiritual lessons through natural phenomena.

Scripture: Ostensibly 1 Kings 19:11,12; Isa. 30:15; Mark 1:17,18; Phil.
4:7

Fairest Lord Jesus

Background: This is a German hymn written in the 17th Century. Also
called the Crusaders Hymn, but there’s no proof crusaders ever sang it.
Published in America by Richard Willis in 1850. The “fairness” is
associated with Jesus as a boy of age 12 and with His growth in wisdom
and stature.

Doctrine:

• Jesus as Ruler of universe and nature

• Jesus, the perfect Son of God and Perfect Son of Man

• Jesus, greater than the angels

• Doctrine of Salvation which brings joy and gladness to the sinner.

Scripture: Song 5:16; Isa. 60:2,3

Faith of Our Fathers

Background: Written by Frederick Faber in 1849, probably as a result of
being acquainted with many who had died for their faith in Christ. This
song has long been a hymn of Christian loyalty and was closely connected
with the early faith of the Fathers who found America.

Doctrine:

• Faith as a quality that never dies; faith lives on in the hearts of
men regardless of the circumstances

• Undeserved Suffering

• Dying Grace

• Evangelization, “winning the nations”

• Liberty, only through the Word

Scripture: Heb. 11:1,13,16; 1 Tim. 6:12

Glory Be to the Father

Background: Part of this hymn dates back to the time of the apostles and
post-apostolic fathers. It is called the Lesser Doxology. The second
part was written in 529 AD and is called the Greater Doxology. Sung in
many churches after sermons and prayers and at the dedication of
churches.

Doctrine:

• Trinity: Father, Son, Holy Spirit

• Praise

• Immutability

• Eternity

Scripture: Jude 25

Glorious Things of Thee Are Spoken

Background: Written by John Newton when he was a slave ship captain. He
had been taught the Word of God as a child but he forsook those
teachings and became a rough sailor. After a vicious storm at sea, he
turned to study the Word again and eventually entered the ministry. This
hymn was written in 1779 from this background.

Doctrine:

• Verse 1: the Church pictured as a prepared city; the Word of God; the
Rock; Salvation and Victory

• Verse 2: Family relationship; Grace

• Verse 3: Leadership; Eternal purpose of God

Scripture: Psalm 87:3; 46:4; Rev. 21:2

God of Our Fathers

Background: Written by Rev. Daniel Roberts as a U. S. Centennial hymn to
be sung on the 4th of July in 1876. This was an expression of praise to
God for victory received for our nation and as a memorial to it.

Doctrine:

• God the omnipotent Creator

• Divine Institutions; God related to our forefathers

• Verse 2: God related to the leadership of the nation; the basis for
law in a nation

• Verse 3: God as national preserver; God’s grace and provision

• Verse 4: The Christian Way of Life in trouble, labor, toil

Scripture: Psalm 44:1-3,8

Hark the Herald Angels Sing

Background: Written by Charles Wesley in 1739. The hymn was revised, and
some obsolete words were put into better style, by a Mr. Kelly, Wesley’s
book steward.

Doctrine:

• Verse 1: Christ as King; Peace; Mercy; Reconciliation

• Verse 2: Christ in eternity past; Fullness of time; virgin birth of
Christ, Incarnation; Hypostatic Union

• Verse 3: Christ as Prince of Peace; Christ our Righteousness;
resurrection; the New Birth

Scripture: Isa. 9:6; Luke 2:13,14

He Leadeth Me

Background: Written by Joseph Gilmore during the darkest hours of the
Civil War (1862). He was attending Brown University and Newton
Theological Institution and was asked to occupy the pulpit for a couple
of weeks at the First Baptist Church in Philadelphia. He wrote this hymn
from Psalm 23, which he had given as an exposition at a mid-week
service.

Doctrine:

• Verse 1: Divine guidance, from the standpoint of comfort

• Verse 2: doctrine of National Disaster and pressure with divine
guidance

• Verse 3: One Day at a Time; Status Quo

• Verse 4: Dying Grace; Eternity

Scripture: Psalm 23:1-3; Rev. 7:17

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty

Background: Written by Reginald Heber in 1827. He attended Oxford
University and received honors for his Latin verse. He was the vicar at
Hadnet for 16 years and wrote many hymns for special Sundays of the
church year.

Doctrine:

• Verse 1: Holiness of the Godhead; Worship; Mercy of God; Trinity

• Verse 2: Worship in Eternity; Angelic Worship of Christ; Immutability
of God

• Verse 3: Sin and Darkness; sinfulness of Man; attributes of God

• Verse 4: Sovereignty of God; Omnipotence; Creation

How Firm a Foundation

Background: Not much known about the origins of this song. Possibly
written by Robert Keene in 1787

Doctrine:

• Verse 1: Completed Canon; Christ as Refuge of the soul

• Verse 2: Fear and its remedy; provision for the believer in time;
Omnipotence of God

• Verse 3: Undeserved Suffering and Sorrow; Testing

• Verse 4: Testing; sufficiency of Grace; refinement of faith through
testing

• Verse 5: Eternal Security

Scripture: Isa. 43:1,2; Heb. 13:5

