---
title: Propitiation
layout: lesson
---


**Propitiation 3**

Propitiation

*Propitiation* is the work of the Lord Jesus Christ by which He appeases
the wrath of God and conciliates Him who would otherwise be offended by
our sin and would demand that we pay the penalty for it.

Propitiation is translated from the Greek word (**hilasterion**),
meaning “that which expiates or propitiates” or “the gift which procures
propitiation”. The word is also used in the New Testament for the place
of propitiation, the “mercy seat.” (Heb. 9:5). There is frequent similar
use of **hilasterion** in the Septuagint. Ex. 25:18 ff. The mercy seat
was sprinkled with atoning blood on the Day of Atonement (Lev. 16:14),
representing that the righteous sentence of the Law had been executed,
changing a judgment seat into a mercy seat (Heb. 9:11-15; compare with
“throne of grace” in Heb. 4:14-16; place of communion, Ex. 25:21-22).

Another Greek word, (**hilasmos**), is used for Christ as our
propitiation. 1 John 2:2; 4:10, and for “atonement” in the Septuagint
(Lev. 25:9). The thought in the Old Testament sacrifices and in the New
Testament fulfillment is that Christ completely satisfied the just
demands of a holy God for judgment on sin by His death on the cross.

God, foreseeing the cross, is declared righteous in forgiving sins in
the Old Testament period as well as in justifying sinners under the new
covenant (Rom. 3:25, 26; cf. Ex. 29:33, note). Propitiation is not the
placating of a vengeful God but, rather, it is the satisfying the
righteousness of a holy God, thereby making it possible for Him to show
mercy without compromising His righteousness or justice.

The Hebrew **kaphar**, means “to propitiate, to atone for sin”..
According to scripture, the sacrifice required by the Law only covered
the individual’s sin making the sin offering and secured personal divine
forgiveness. The Old Testament sacrifices never removed man’s sin. “It
is not possible…”, Heb. 10:4. The Israelite’s offering implied
confession of sin in anticipation of Christ’s sacrifice which did,
finally, “put away” the sins “done previously in the forbearance of
God”. Rom. 3:25; Heb. 9:15, 26. The word “atonement” does not occur in
the New Testament; the word in Rom. 5:11 is “reconciliation”.

The beginning of the subject of propitiation is found far back in the
Bible, back to the designing of the tabernacle in the wilderness, the
tent which God had the people of Israel set up which would be the center
of His presence on earth.

The tabernacle occupies a large portion of Scripture, sixteen chapters
in the book of Exodus and the whole book of Leviticus. Every feature of
the tabernacle, of the worship carried out there, of the priestly life
and duties, of the vestments of the priests, the sacrifices, the feast
days–every feature was vitally important and designed by the Lord for
eternal purposes. It is very important for the church age believer to
have a good working knowledge of the Levitical system in order to
appreciate fully the work of Christ and the plan of God as they have
been instituted in the world.

There was great stress on the blueprint of the tabernacle.

*Exodus 25:8, 9 “And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may dwell
among them. According to all that I show thee, after the pattern of the
tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even so
shall ye make it.”*

The pattern was given to Moses on Mt. Sinai, along with the Law. Read
Hebrews 8:1–6. The tabernacle was a symbolical expression of spiritual
truth.

The congregation of the Jews did not go beyond the courtyard of the
tabernacle. They made offerings only at the brazen altar; and only the
priests were allowed to go anyplace else in the tabernacle. The
tabernacle was the dwelling place of God on earth, and God was
unapproachable by sinful men. The main lessons being taught had to do
with the perfection of God and the sinfulness of man.

The Furniture of the Tabernacle

Brazen Altar – This altar was the be­ginning of a person’s approach to
God. Animal sacrifices made there taught that substitutionary sacrifice
is the first step toward fellowship with God. When a person passed
outside the gate of the tabernacle, the only thing that he could see was
the smoke rising from the burnt offerings, and through the one gate
could be seen the altar of sacrifice and the blood being shed.
Everything else was hidden from view by the curtain. This was a
continuous reminder of “the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the
world.” The only thing the unbeliever can ever see is the Gospel, the
good news of Christ’s substitutionary sacrifice for us.

A description of the brazen altar is found in Ex. 27:1–8 and Ex. 38:1-7.

The Laver– Here the priests cleaned their hands and arms before
performing any service or act of worship (Ex. 30:17-21). It was placed
between the brazen altar and the tent of worship (the holy place). This
cleansing symbolized the spiritual cleansing which is essential to both
worship and service.

The Candlesticks– These illustrated the need for illumination, the light
of the world. See Ex. 25:31–40; 37:17–24.

The Table of Bread – An illustration of the need for spiritual food. See
Ex. 25:23–30; 37:10–16.

The Altar of Incense– From Ex. 30:1–10, this piece of tabernacle
furniture illustrated the need for acceptable worship and prayer. No
animals were offered on this altar. The offering was an incense
offering, indicat­ing that which is pleasing to God, divine good (gold,
silver, and precious stones). The fire for the altar of incense came
from the brazen altar, indicating that worship can only come after
salvation. No strange fire was allowed; and Nadab and Abihu died for
disobeying this rule.

The Veil– The veil symbolized the barrier between God and man; only the
high priest could enter the holy of holies, and that only once a year on
the day of atonement, to offer the blood on the mercy seat of the ark of
the covenant.

The Ark of the Covenant – The ark of the covenant was located in the
holy of holies of the Tabernacle. It was made of acacia wood and
overlaid with gold. Its dimensions were 50 inches long by 30 inches wide
by 30 inches deep. The ark was a picture of Christ bearing our sins, the
box part representing Christ. The wood illustrated the humanity of
Christ, the gold represented His deity.

Inside the ark were three objects representing sin (Num. 17:8, 10;
Heb. 9:4). The tables of the Law represented sin in the sense of
violation or transgression of God’s order. The pot of manna represented
rejection of God’s provision. Aaron’s rod represented revolt against
God’s authority.

Over the top of the box was a lid of solid gold, the mercy seat (or
throne). Over each end of the mercy seat was a gold cherub, the highest
ranking angel. The first cherub represented the absolute righteousness
of God, and the second cherub represented the justice of God. Together
they represented the holiness of God. The cherubs faced toward each
other, wings outstretched towards each other, and looked down at the
mercy seat. “Righteousness” looks down and condemns (Rom. 3:23).
“Justice” looks down and assesses a penalty.

Once a year, on the Day of Atonement, the high priest went into the holy
of holies twice; once to make atonement for his own sins, and then to do
so for the people. He sprinkled blood from the sacrifice on the ark, on
the top of the mercy seat, between the cherubs. This was a graphic
illustration of God’s grace provision for sin. “Righteousness” looks at
the blood of the animal, which represents the spiritual death of Christ
on the cross, His substitutionary atonement, and is satisfied. “Justice”
looks at the blood and is satisfied that the penalty paid for sin was
sufficient, teaching that Christ was judged and paid the penalty for us.

Therefore, the ark speaks of redemption - Christ paid for our sins, paid
our ransom, to purchase us from the slave market of sin.

So we have in the ark and the mercy seat a picture of God’s satisfaction
with the work of Jesus Christ known as propitiation.

Now, the Hebrew word for mercy seat is **kapporeth**. The Greek word
used in the Septuagint translation of the Old Testament is
**hilasterion**. This same Greek word is found in the New Testament in
Rom. 3:25; Heb. 9:5; 1 John 2:2; and 4:10 and is translated “mercy seat”
or “place of propitiation”. So there is a direct relationship between
the mercy seat in the tabernacle and the doctrine of propitiation.

Because of propitiation, God is free to love the believer without
compromising either His righteousness or justice. The thought in the Old
Testament sacrifices and in the New Testament fulfillment is that Christ
completely satisfied the just demands of a holy God for judgment of sin.

Propitiation is not the placating of a vengeful God; but it is, rather,
the satisfying of the righteousness of a holy God making it possible for
Him to show mercy without compromise. Propitiation demonstrates the
consistency of God’s character in saving the worst sinners. Propitiation
reconciles man to God. This means that sin is no longer the issued
between man and God. The only issue, for the Old Testament and New
Testament believers, is “believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shalt be saved.” (Acts 16:31)

