---
title: Reversionism
description:  a comprehensive study of the doctrine showing how the Lord deals with recalcitrant and implacable Christians.
layout: lesson
---

Portions of this study are taken from the teachings of Pastor R. B. Thieme, Jr., Berachah Church, Houston, Texas

**Definition and Description**

Reversionism is an act of reversing or turning in the opposite way, or a state of being so turned. As believers we were designed to execute the plan of God. But in reversionism we turn the other way and cannot be distinguished from our pre-salvation status. We are believers thinking human viewpoint.

**Reversionism is the act of reverting to a former state, habit, belief, or practice of sinning.**

**Reversionism is the status of the believer who fails to execute the plan of God for the Church Age. He returns to his pre-salvation modus operandi and modus vivendi.**

Reversionism is a reversal of priorities, attitudes, affections, the object of personal love accompanied by the destruction of impersonal love, and the change of modus operandi and personality. Inside the cosmic system there is a complete change of personality.

The process of reverting begins with implosion, or exploding within, by yielding to the temptations of the sin nature. Implosion leads to explosion or fragmentation. Fragmentation unchecked leads to reversionism.

Reversionism is maximum control of the sin nature over the life of the believer so that the believer functions under the dictates of the sin nature exactly as he did as an unbeliever.

The reversionistic believer is classified as a loser in the Christian life. He doesn’t lose his salvation; that’s impossible. But by failing to execute the plan of God, the loser loses his escrow blessings for time and eternity.

Reversionism is a series of related failures in the spiritual life which results in failure to execute the plan of God, terminating in Christian degeneracy.

Christian degeneracy is defined as the decline from the normal standards of the plan of God for the Church Age through the process of implosion, explosion, and reversion. In this process, the Church Age believer remains unchecked by the utilization of confession of sin, and by other post-salvation problem solving devices of the plan.

Therefore, the believer unchecked by confession of sin sinks into subnormal categories of personal sinning.

Reversionism is lack of spiritual growth, apostasy, failure to attain the three stages of spiritual adulthood: (1) spiritual self-esteem, (2) spiritual autonomy, and (3) spiritual maturity.

Reversionism is the believer’s retrogression because of negative volition toward the mystery doctrine of the Church Age, which both defines and reveals God’s plan, will, and purpose for your life. Reversionism is recession from any stage of spiritual growth through negative volition to doctrine. Reversionism is characterized by negative volition to doctrine, being influenced by evil, and results in perpetual carnality causing a life of perpetual discipline.

Reversion is a technical theological term used for rejecting absolute truth, and drawing into your mind or accepting relative truth.

Reversion is a technical theological term for the results of fragmentation.

Fragmentation results in eight stages of reversionism.

1.  Reaction and distraction.

2.  Frantic search for happiness.

2  Operation boomerang.

2  Emotional revolt of the soul.

2  Permanent negative volition.

2  Blackout of the soul.

2  Scar tissue of the soul.

2  Reverse process reversionism.

While the carnal believer can still be positive toward doctrine and faithful in using the confession of sin technique, the reversionistic believer is negative toward doctrine, has entered the vacuum of the soul, and does not consistently use the confession of sin technique. It takes only a moment to recover from carnality by the use of confession of sin, but it takes years to recover from reversionism.

The reversionist cannot be distinguished from the unbeliever in mental attitude, modus vivendi, motivation, and modus operandi.

Reversionism can occur in both unbelievers, who reject the laws of divine establishment, or in believers, which is analogous to being under the influence of evil or being apostate.

The reversionistic believer is under demon influence. The believer cannot be demon possessed, but he can come under demon influence. In demon influence, the soul of the unbeliever or reversionistic believer is infiltrated by false doctrine, called the “doctrine of demons” in 1Tim 4:1. This comes through the vacuum of the mind, described in Ephesians 4:17 to 19.

Reversionism is a simple means of explaining that there are degrees of failure in the Christian life, just as there are degrees of success.

**Reversionism and Carnality.**

Reversionism must be distinguished from carnality.

Carnality is an absolute which describes the believer out of fellowship with God and in a state of sin under the control of the sin nature,

Rom 7

Reversionism is relative. It is a relative state of apostasy and decline described by the various categories of retrogression. In reversionism, you are perpetually carnal.

A carnal believer is generally positive to doctrine, faithful in the use of the confession of sin technique, and never loses interest in Christian doctrine.

The reversionistic believer follows the pattern of implosion, explosion, and sinks into the various stages of reversion unchecked by confession of sin.

While all reversionists are carnal, under the control of their sin natures, not all carnal believers are reversionistic.

Carnality can exist temporarily while the believer is advancing in the plan.

The believer is in an absolute state (spiritual or carnal) while growing, just as he is in an absolute state while declining.

Carnality can be either a temporary or permanent setback in the execution of God’s will, purpose, and plan for your life.

1 Cor 3:1-3, “And I, brethren, could not speak to you as to spiritual persons [believers filled with the Spirit], but as unto carnal [fleshly, belonging to the sin nature], as childish in Christ. I gave you milk [basic doctrine] to drink, not solid food, for you were not able to receive it, and you are still not able [to perceive it]. For you are still carnal, belonging to the sin nature [self-fragmented], for since there is jealousy and strife among you, are you not carnal and keep
walking in conformity with men?”

* Carnality is manifest in implosion or self-fragmentation, and then in explosion or polarized fragmentation.

* You walk in conformity with men when in the stages of reversionism, indistinguishable from unbelievers.

**categories of sinning related to reversionism.**

Frequent sinning is the status quo of the believer who follows the pattern of implosion, explosion and the first four stages of reversionism. Frequent sinning is characterized by ignorance; therefore, failure to utilize the confession of sin technique.

Continuous sinning is the status quo of the believer who follows the pattern of implosion, explosion and the last four stages of reversionism.

Sporadic sinning is when the believer checks implosion, explosion and reversion by consistent use of confession of sin of 1 Jn 1:9, followed up with the use of the other problem solving devices. This is the status of the believer on his way to spiritual adulthood.

Occasional sinning is when the believer checks implosion, explosion and reversion through rebound and the other problem solving devices. This is the status of the believer in spiritual adulthood.

**The Eight Stages of Reversionism.**

*_Reaction and Distraction._*

By the time the believer has gone through implosion (self-fragmentation)
and explosion (polarized fragmentation), he has become negative toward
the teaching of Bible doctrine.

There are two categories of negative volition in the first stage of
reversionism: reaction and distraction.

Negative volition from reaction is linked to polarized legalism, in
which you react to the conflict between legalism and antinomianism.

Other forms of fragmentation cause reaction to Bible doctrine.
Subjective fragmentation includes unrealistic expectation which is
arrogant preoccupation with self, and role model arrogance which is
arrogant preoccupation with others. Human relationship fragmentation is
illustrated by frustration in Christian fellowship and marriage.

On the other hand, distraction from Bible doctrine can be caused by
apathy, indifference, wrong priorities, and the arrogance complex of
sins.

Many people believed in Christ at an early age. But as they grew older
and more sophisticated, they began to change their thinking due to peer
pressure and education. Then they reacted to Christianity, Christian
people, or a local church. They became distracted by something or
someone. Distraction to the plan of God is based upon reaction.

This reaction and distraction leads to fragmentation. Every believer is
a walking grenade, who pulls the pin of his grenade by the use of his
own volition. Pulling the pin comes from committing a sin related to the
arrogance complex in some form of reaction. Once you fragment your life,
the first thing you do is react to everything that was once important to
you spiritually.

Arrogance is the number one distraction to Bible doctrine.

**Rom 12:2-3**, “Stop being conformed to this world [peer pressure], but
be transformed by the renovation of your thought, that you may prove
what the will of God is; namely, the good of intrinsic value achievement
[advance to spiritual maturity], the well-pleasing to God, the mature
status quo [manufacture of invisible hero]. For I say through the grace
which has been given to me to every one who is among you, stop thinking
of self in terms of arrogance beyond what you ought to think, but think
in terms of sanity [absolute truth] for the purpose of being rational
without illusion as God has assigned to each one of us a standard of
thinking from doctrine.”

Absolute truth is always related to reality. There are boundaries in
which you must think. To be rational without illusion is the fantastic
result of the daily perception, metabolization, and application of Bible
doctrine. God has assigned to each one of us a standard of thinking from
two categories of doctrine: the absolute principles of theology, and the
applications that are given from those principles. Obviously, we cannot
progress in the Christian life without the standard of thinking from
doctrine. If we are not progressing through perception, metabolization,
and application of doctrine, we are retrogressing. No one stands still
in the Christian way of life.

In this stage, it is possible and even probable that the believer can
recover through the use of confession of sin. At the same time,
something may challenge him back to right priorities, and learning and
using the problem solving devices. It may take divine discipline to wake
him up.

The presence of reactor factors in the life result in distraction from
doctrine. Reactor factors are closely related to the believer’s initial
and subsequent distraction from Bible doctrine. The reactor factors
include many antithetical concepts which follow the trends of the
believer’s sin nature. Reactor factors include the following.

-   Wrong priorities, in which the believer places money, success,
    pleasure, loved ones, friends, social life, sex, material things, or
    normal things, over God. When these things take priority over God,
    then the believer is in trouble. He develops a personal scale of
    values that excludes God, God relationship, love of God, and
    occupation with the person of Christ.

-   Rejection of authority in general or rejection of the authority of
    the pastor-teacher results in rejection of the Church Age message
    regarding God’s will, plan, and purpose for your life.

-   Personality conflict often comes from hypersensitivity and other
    forms of fragmentation.

-   A lack of objectivity when reprimanded, either by the Scripture or
    by someone in authority.

-   Reaction to gossip, maligning, or unjust treatment of one kind or
    another.

-   Blaming self-fragmentation on others rather than on yourself. None
    of us ever grow up until we take the responsibility for our own bad
    decisions.

-   Lack of concentration on Bible doctrine due to drug addiction, a
    drinking problem, mental illness, criminality, or grieving or
    quenching the Holy Spirit.

-   Bad decisions from a position of weakness.

-   Subjective arrogance fragmentation is arrogant preoccupation with
    self and others to the exclusion of reality.

-   Lack of motivation from a personal sense of destiny, personal love
    for God the Father, or occupation with the person of Christ.

In summary, reactor factors include the modus operandi of fragmentation,
as well as boredom, disillusion, loneliness, self-pity, frustration,
hypersensitivity, lack of enforced and genuine humility, objectivity,
and teachability.

Arrogance means lack of humility, objectivity, or teachability.

All of this results in cosmic involvement and subsequent demon influence
of the soul. Of course, demons cannot indwell the body of the believer,
because the believer is indwelt by all three persons of the Trinity.
Therefore, demon possession is limited to unbelievers only. But demons
can influence the thinking of believers, which is accomplished through
reversionism.

See Topic: Cosmic System

Once negative volition sets in, there is a vacuum in the soul, which is
the beginning of reversionism. The beginning of reversionism is always
related to reaction and distraction because of negative volition toward
Bible doctrine.

The first stage of reversionism includes not only the arrogance of
cosmic one, but the acceptance of false doctrine as a result of
rejecting true doctrine.

-   1 Tim 4:1, “But the same Holy Spirit explicitly communicates that in
    latter periods of time [between first and Second Advents of Christ],
    some believers will become apostate from doctrine, paying attention
    to deceitful spirits and concentrating on doctrines of demons.”

-   1 Tim 6:3-4, “If anyone teaches a different doctrine and does not
    concur with sound doctrine, even doctrines pertaining to godliness,
    he has received arrogance, understanding nothing. Furthermore, he
    has a morbid obsession about controversies and verbal conflicts from
    which originate jealousy, discord, evil speculation.”

Therefore, in stage one, distractions to Bible doctrine result in
negative volition. Negative volition creates the vacuum in the soul that
sucks in all the false doctrine.

### 2. The Frantic Search for Happiness.

Once you have become negative toward doctrine and created the vacuum of
the soul, you begin to suck in false concepts which result in the
frantic search for happiness.

Once a believer goes negative toward doctrine, he becomes frantic in his
search for happiness. The frantic search for happiness is described in
one phrase in 2 Tim 3:4: “lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God”

The frantic search for happiness has many directions: power, influence,
approbation, success, status symbols, money, pleasure, social life,
friends, health, sex, material things associated with happiness. There’s
nothing wrong with many of these things, but when they have number one
priority in your life, Bible doctrine will inevitably be neglected and
rejected.

If you are not content or happy with what you have now, then you will
never be content or happy with what you will have in the future. So if
the reversionist is not content with what he has at the moment when the
vacuum of the soul is first opened by negative volition and distraction,
he will never be content with anything more in the future in
reversionism. If you are unhappy with what you have at the moment of
implosion, explosion, and reversionism, you will be the same if every
wish and desire of your soul were given to you at the moment you entered
into reversionism. This is why the frantic search for happiness is
frenetic.

Happiness or contentment is based on capacity for life from metabolized
Bible doctrine in the right lobe of the soul, not from prosperity. In
other words, once you believe in Jesus Christ, happiness is not what you
have and unhappiness is not what you have not. Happiness is based on
capacity for life, which is based on mental attitude, which is based on
the amount of metabolized doctrine in your right lobe.

Prosperity, success, power, approbation, status symbols, money, sex,
pleasure, social life, or material things are really not a source of
happiness. They are enjoyed by people with capacity for happiness and
life, but they are a distraction to believers without capacity from
doctrine.

The only true source of happiness for the believer in Jesus Christ is
metabolized doctrine in the soul, which develops +H. +H is that problem
solving device where we share the happiness of God. You must develop
capacity to share the happiness of God. God only sends His happiness to
the soul that has doctrine resident therein. The soul in reversionism is
no home for God’s happiness.

The advance through each stage of spiritual adulthood increases capacity
for life. Advance in the plan of God always provides a balance between
capacity for what you have and the enjoyment of what you have.

+H or sharing the happiness of God must be distinguished from the misery
encountered in the frantic search for happiness. Happiness comes to the
believer who executes the plan, but there is no happiness to the
believer involved in the frantic search for happiness.

The frantic search for happiness finds the believer going in the
direction of the trends of his sin nature. Legalism unchecked results in
moral degeneracy. Antinomianism unchecked results in immoral degeneracy.

Heb 13:5, “Let your lifestyle be free from the love for money; be
content with what you have, for He Himself has said, \`I will never
leave you nor forsake you.’”

-   You cannot be content with what you have unless you have maximum
    doctrine resident in your soul.

-   This contentment begins with spiritual self-esteem, moves into
    spiritual autonomy, and reaches its peak in spiritual maturity.

-   To be content with what you have is +H, which comes from capacity in
    the soul. Capacity in the soul comes from Bible doctrine. The vacuum
    in the soul is the opposite of this, and inevitably results in the
    frantic search for happiness.

1 Tim 6:6-7, “But godliness is a means of great gain when accompanied by
contentment [+H]. For we brought nothing into this world, with the
result that we can take nothing out of it. And if we have food and
clothing, with these we shall be content.”

Phil 4:11, “Not that we speak on the basis of want, for I have learned
to be content in whatever circumstances I am.”

Contentment is something you learn through perception, metabolization,
and application of Bible doctrine.

The only thing that improves with spiritual growth is your capacity for
life, love, and happiness. The only thing that is different with the
attainment of spiritual adulthood is that you have capacity to enjoy
whatever you have.

Advance in the plan of God always provides the balance between your
capacity for what you have and the enjoyment of what you have.

The priority solution to the problems of life is occupation with Christ
which provides this capacity.

-   The mystery doctrine of the Church Age must be your number one
    priority.

-   Concentrate on priority number one.

-   Organize your life around priority number one.

-   Organize your thinking around priority number one.

-   Then you have capacity which increases, producing contentment, not
    with what you have, but with the doctrine in your soul.

Wrong priorities cause the frantic search for happiness.

-   If your number one priority is romance, friendship, business,
    success, social life, etc., you concentrate on that number one
    priority.

-   You organize your life around that number one priority.

-   You organize your thinking around that number one priority.

-   You become involved in the frantic search for happiness.

The vacuum of the soul which produces emptiness, futility, and
nothingness creates a demand for happiness in your life to replace what
is missing in your life; i.e., the mystery doctrine for the Church Age.

The frantic search for happiness becomes the alternative to the daily
perception of Bible doctrine and execution of the plan. Reversion and
the frantic search for happiness replaces your desire for Bible
doctrine. The presence of the vacuum in the soul replaces the hunger for
doctrine with the lust for happiness. Once you lust for happiness,
you’ll never find it.

The frantic search for happiness follows the trends of the sin nature in
polarized fragmentation.

-   The trend toward legalism results in moral degeneracy and no
    happiness.

-   The trend toward antinomianism results in immoral degeneracy and no
    happiness.

-   The trend toward legalism includes crusader activism, self-righteous
    arrogance, personality arrogance, the arrogance of Christian
    service, irrational (emotional) arrogance, the arrogance of
    unhappiness (subjective preoccupation with self), iconoclastic
    arrogance (role model arrogance, the feet of clay syndrome),
    so-called “victorious living,” the arrogance of asceticism, using
    Christian service as a means of spirituality.

-   The trend toward antinomianism is related to multifarious sexual
    sins, drug addiction, violence, criminality, total self-indulgence,
    or debauchery.

-   Others seek their happiness in a false emphasis on experience, the
    so-called “victorious life commitment,” holy rollers speaking in
    tongues, fundy flagellation and self-denial, or in giving gimmicks
    like tithing for blessing.

The frantic search for happiness includes moving toward either moral or
immoral degeneracy depending on the area of weakness of the sin nature,
trying to find stimulating circumstances or people, and trying to be
entertained as much as possible. In this stage, true objects of love are
discarded for pseudo-love objects.

### 3. Operation Boomerang

The boomerang, an Australian weapon used by the aborigines of Australia,
is a missile-type weapon, shaped like an elbow. When thrown with
accuracy, it can hit the target and kill the animal on the spot. But if
they miss, the boomerang comes back to them so they can try again.

Christians who miss the target and fail to execute the plan of God
experience the boomerang effect of the frantic search for happiness.

In this stage, the frantic search for happiness boomerangs and returns
to the believer in reversionism, intensifying the original reactor
factors and his unhappiness, so that the believer loses control of his
life.

When the frantic search for happiness boomerangs, frustration becomes
greater frustration, misery becomes greater misery, and unhappiness
becomes intensified unhappiness.

Every search for happiness makes happiness more elusive. Therefore, the
believer is bored, disillusioned, frustrated, and miserable.

Pleasure, social and sexual distractions, and drug addiction only
intensifies his problem in life. The same intensification of problems
occurs with the distractions of the morally degenerate believer. All
these only remove the believer farther away from happiness.

So the pursuit of happiness results in bad decisions from a position of
weakness, and intensifies the unhappiness of the believer. This results
in intensified frustration.

So operation boomerang means loss of control of your life and the
intensification of fragmentation and reversionism.

Operation boomerang destroys any use of the problem solving devices of
the plan of God. Instead of +H (Joy, divine happiness from God) as a
problem solving device, the believer has –H (human unhappiness).

-   Under -H, you cannot build your happiness on the details of life;
    e.g., money, success, pleasure, sexual life, social life, friends,
    family, loved ones, or materialistic things.

-   Under -H, you cannot even build your happiness on changing the
    devil’s world through crusader arrogance, social engineering,
    violence, civil disobedience, or revolution.

-   In the arrogance of unhappiness, the believer assumes that marriage
    is a state of happiness, and all too often makes a bad decision with
    regard to marriage. This boomerangs, making the marital state one of
    terrible unhappiness.

-   -H depends on involvement with some form of success or stimulation
    which is related to a moment of time, pleasure, success, power, or
    approbation.

-   But all this boomerangs, and the believer discovers that romance,
    friendship, sex, promotion, or prosperity does not mean happiness,
    but the intensification of an already miserable life.

-   Promotion cannot make you happy. For in operation boomerang, you
    will be promoted beyond your capacity. Then you are unhappy from
    knowing your limitations too late.

-   Marriage cannot make you happy. For in operation boomerang, you have
    no capacity for love. Then the relationship intensifies and sours,
    so that your problems become greater and greater in marriage.

-   Success, prosperity, sex, or pleasure cannot make you happy. For in
    operation boomerang, they intensify your misery. This is because the
    reversionistic believer has neither capacity for success nor any use
    of the problem solving devices.

### 4. Emotional Revolt of the Soul

The soul is composed of certain characteristics.

-   Self-consciousness means you are aware of yourself.

-   ((2) Mentality is composed of the left lobe, where you store
    academic and technical information, and the right lobe, where you
    store Bible doctrine.

-   Emotion is designed by God to respond to what you have in your
    soul’s precordial frontal lobes as an appreciator.

-   Volition has positive and negative poles.

The mentality is the male part of the soul. Emotion is the female part
of the soul. God’s design is the mentality dominate the soul, including
the emotion. But when the emotion dominates the soul and takes over, the
person becomes irrational and cannot think.

Emotion has no doctrinal content, no mentality, no rationality, and no
virtue. Emotion is in its proper place only when it is under the control
of the mentality of the soul, where doctrine resides.

As an appreciator, emotion is wonderful. But as the controller, emotion
is a monster. Emotion takes control of the soul through such things as
drug addiction.

In the spiritual life of the believer, emotion is designed to respond to
metabolized doctrine in the right lobe. But once emotion revolts, it
becomes the aggressor and loses all normal function, becoming distorted.
Then the believer becomes irrational and a flunky to the sin nature.

Rev 2:23, “And I will kill her children [Church Age believers] with
death [sin unto death], and all the churches will know that I am He who
searches the emotions and the right lobes.”

Listing emotions first before the right lobes shows that the two are out
of balance.

When emotions revolt, they become the dictator and aggressor of the
soul, doctrine in the soul is neutralized or distorted, hindering the
execution of the plan.

Emotional revolt of the soul is described in Phil 3:1“Whose destiny is
destruction [sin unto death], whose god is their emotion, whose fame
comes by means of dishonor, who keep on thinking about earthly things.”

Emotional revolt of the soul divorces the believer from reality, and
substitutes irrationality combined with arrogance to produce mental
illness. Therefore, emotional revolt of the soul can quickly lead to
psychopathy.

Emotion is a hindrance to the perception of Bible doctrine, to
consistent post-salvation epistemological rehabilitation.

2 Cor 6:11-12, “O you Corinthians! Our mouths [means of communication by
Paul, Apollos, and Timothy] have been opened face to face with you; our
right lobes have been enlarged [we were prepared]. Therefore, you have
not been hindered by us [Paul, Apollos, Timothy], but you have been
hindered by your own emotions.”

Emotional revolt of the soul becomes a distraction to the execution of
the plan.

Rom 16:17-18, “Now I urge you brethren, be alert for those who are
causing dissensions and apostasies [false, reversionistic teaching]
contrary to Bible doctrine which you have learned, for such believers do
not obey our Lord Jesus Christ, but they obey their own emotions,
serving themselves; and by smooth and flattering speech, they deceive
the right lobes of the stupid [reversionists].”

Emotions have no capacity for thought, reason, or discernment.
Therefore, the soul becomes blind, unreasonable, unrestrained, arrogant,
immoral, legalistic, antinomian, and anti-doctrine.

Emotional revolt of the soul means loss of a personal sense of destiny,
failure to execute the plan of God, failure to understand and utilize
the problem solving devices of the plan as well as the unique
characteristics of the Church Age, and failure to understand and use
your portfolio of invisible assets.

Therefore, emotional revolt makes it impossible to become an invisible
hero and thereby glorify God.

### 5. Permanent Negative Volition Toward Doctrine or Permanent Cosmic Involvement.

As a result of the reactor factors, the frantic search for happiness,
operation boomerang, and an emotional revolt of the soul, the believer
suffers loss of Biblical priorities, Biblical norms, and Biblical
standards resulting in bad decisions from a position of weakness. This
means the believer loses control of his life and a personal sense of
destiny, if the believer ever had it. The believer can no longer be
distinguished from an unbeliever.

So stage five is the malfunction of post-salvation epistemological
rehabilitation. It is the beginning of Christian degeneracy.

Negative volition does not metabolize doctrine, so that operation Z
malfunctions. This permanent negative volition is gradual.

Negative volition toward doctrine means that the believer can never
understand God’s will, plan, and purpose for his life. Therefore, he
cannot grow spiritually. As a result, all his works are dead works and
human good, totally unacceptable to God. He is operating in the energy
of the flesh rather than in the power of God the Holy Spirit.

The believer in stage five has lost complete control of his life. He has
replaced any doctrine he ever had with false doctrine and human
viewpoint. In his thinking, he cannot be distinguished from his
unbeliever counterpart.

The road to degeneracy is now guaranteed and even motivated by this
permanent negative volition.

The only destiny we have as Church Age believers is related to the plan
of God, which we must therefore understand.

-   Every believer has a destiny. But the experience of having a
    personal sense of destiny comes only to those believers who grow in
    grace and function under operation Z.

-   The believer’s destiny is always associated with the execution of
    the plan of God in becoming an invisible hero.

-   With negative volition toward doctrine, the believer has no
    fulfillment of his destiny.

-   You cannot build your destiny, which is the plan, on talent, human
    ability, dreams, or experiences.

-   You have no destiny apart from God who has given to you the plan for
    the manufacture of invisible heroes and the execution of God’s will
    for your life.

-   Understanding our destiny and what follows salvation depends on our
    understanding of the mystery doctrine of the Church Age.

-   Through physical birth, we have a purpose in life. But through
    regeneration, we have a destiny in life.

-   God gave us eternal life in regeneration. This means we have a
    twofold destiny.

-   We have a destiny in time which is the execution of the plan, by
    which we become invisible heroes.

-   We have a destiny in eternity related to our resurrection bodies.

-   Negative volition toward doctrine cancels the fulfillment of our
    destiny in time.

The final three stages of reversionism are the result of permanent
negative volition toward doctrine and subsequent ignorance of the plan
of God for the Church Age.

Characteristics of negative volition toward doctrine.

-   Indifference or apathy toward Bible teaching from a pastor-teacher.

-   Wrong priorities means you’re too busy to consistently hear or teach
    doctrine. There are so many distractions today to pull you from
    Bible class. Wrong priorities doesn’t mean the things we like and do
    are wrong, but that they’re wrong when we put them before Bible
    doctrine.

-   Antagonism or personality conflict with a pastor who is actually
    teaching doctrine. Due to having your eyes on the pastor and
    resenting him in some way, you don’t hear what he’s saying and so
    miss the content of the message. The Holy Spirit is the solution
    here, for He gives you the power and ability to hear what is said
    rather than how it is said, or by whom it is said.

-   Failure to learn and to utilize the problem solving devices of the
    plan of God. For example, spiritual phenomena cannot be understood
    by the believer who fails to use rebound.

-   Lack of concentration and ignorance of good manners. Poor manners is
    a manifestation of thoughtlessness of other people. You cannot
    listen and talk in Bible class at the same time. Talking also
    distracts other people and breaks their concentration.

-   Inability to cope with prosperity or adversity. When people become
    prosperous, they often are distracted from doctrine. Or when people
    cannot cope with adversity, they often seek psychological solutions.

-   Failure to understand your very own portfolio of invisible assets
    includes your very own palace, the place where you execute the plan
    of God.

### 6. Blackout of the Soul

Eph 4:17 gives the technical Greek word for the blackout of the soul:
MATAIOTES. MATAIOTES is a vacuum that sucks in false doctrine. Negative
volition creates a vacuum in the soul. “Therefore, I communicate this,
and because of the Lord, I insist that you no longer walk as Gentiles
[unbelievers] walk in the vacuum of their mind.”

-   Through this vacuum comes the doctrine of demons, including
    religionism, liberalism, crusader arrogance, and anti-establishment
    thinking, 1 Tim 4:1.

-   The false doctrine passing through the vacuum of the soul is called
    demon influence, or being influenced by evil. This is not the same
    as demon possession; in many ways, it is worse.

-   The believer cannot be demon possessed because he is indwelt by God
    the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit.

-   But demon influence comes through false teaching.

-   The believer’s body is the temple of the Holy Spirit whether he’s
    out of or in fellowship.

-   So although the believer cannot be demon possessed, he is vulnerable
    to demon influence which comes from permanent negative volition,
    stage six of reversionism.

-   Infiltration of the doctrine of demons results in the blackout of
    the soul. This comes from failure to be filled with the Spirit, and
    lack of consistent exposure to Bible doctrine.

-   The blackout of the soul is tantamount to God relationship
    fragmentation. God relationship fragmentation is failure to execute
    the plan of God through neglect of post-salvation epistemological
    rehabilitation, and failure to learn and use the portfolio of
    invisible assets and the problem solving devices.

The apostle John describes blackout of the soul in:

-   Jn 12:35, “He who walks in darkness does not know where he goes.”

-   1 Jn 1:6, “If we contend that we have fellowship with Him and we
    keep on walking in darkness, we are lying and we do not live the
    truth.”

-   1 Jn 2:11, “When anyone hates his fellow believer, he is in darkness
    and he walks in darkness, and he does not know where he is going
    because the darkness has blinded his eyes.”

The blackout of the soul indicates ignorance of Bible doctrine, cosmic
involvement, and the replacement of Bible doctrine with false doctrine.

The vacuum of the soul mentioned in Eph 4:17 is the channel created by
negative volition and implosion, through which false doctrine enters
into the soul of the believer.

The mechanics of the blackout of the soul include:

-   Implosion or self-fragmentation.

-   Explosion or polarized fragmentation.

-   Reversion.

Even the unbeliever, by being negative toward the Gospel, has blackout
of the soul.

2 Cor 4:3, “Even if our Gospel is hidden, it is hidden to those who are
perishing, in whose case the god of this world [Satan] has blinded the
minds of those who are unbelieving that they might not see the light of
the Gospel of the glory of Christ who is the image of God.”

### 7. Scar Tissue of the Soul

Eph 4:18, “They are darkened in their way of thinking; they have been
alienated from the life of God because of ignorance which is in them,
because of the scar tissue of their right lobes.”

Scar tissue of the soul is prolonged residence in the cosmic system. It
is prolonged fragmentation unchecked, reaction to any form of accurate
Bible teaching, and strong reaction to those who communicate accurately
the mystery doctrine of the Church Age.

This is tantamount to freezing the valves of the heart or right lobe, so
that there is no more circulation of doctrine in the frame of reference,
memory center, vocabulary storage, categorical storage, conscience,
momentum department, wisdom department, and subconscious mind.

The Scripture calls scar tissue of the soul “hardness of heart,”
“hardening of the neck,” or "hardening of the face.

-   “Hardening the heart” is found in Jn 14:20.

-   “Hardening the neck” is found in Neh 9:16-1This is insubordinate to
    the point of revolt. It is failure to be authority oriented in
    spiritual things, Jer 7:25-27.

-   “Hardening the face” is found in Prov 21:29-31.

At this point, the believer cannot be distinguished from the unbeliever.
Not only that, but he is very anti-authority in both the spiritual and
temporal realms of life.

In this stage is where reversionism becomes a reality. Remember that
reversionism is the act of reverting or returning to a former belief or
practice.

Blackout of the soul plus scar tissue of the soul equals Christian
degeneracy or reverse process reversionism.

Scar tissue of the soul is the status of cosmic involvement, and
therefore a violation of

John 2:1“Stop loving the cosmic system or anything in the cosmic system.
If anyone keeps loving the cosmic system, the love of the Father is not
in him.”

Scar tissue of the soul is the final step into Christian degeneracy,
because scar tissue of the soul is motivation for degeneracy.

Scar tissue of the soul is the enemy of evangelism, Jn 12:40.

-   In 2 Pet 2:22, the unbeliever who is controlled by the cosmic system
    with scar tissue of the soul is described. “It happens to them
    according to the true proverb, \`The dog returns to his own vomit.’”

-   Scar tissue of the soul is the enemy of evangelism.

Rom 2:5, “But because of your hardness of heart and unrepentant right
lobe, you gather up and accumulate wrath for yourself against the day of
wrath, even the manifestation of the just judgment of God.”

The mechanics of the unbeliever’s scar tissue are described in

2 Thess.2:“And with every deception of evil for those who perish
[unbelievers], because they did not receive the love for the truth so as
to be saved. And for this reason, God sends to them a deluding influence
so that they might believe a lie, in order that they all might be
condemned in judgment who do not believe the truth, but take pleasure in
unrighteousness.”

### 8. Reverse Process Reversionism

This is the final stage of reversionism, a combination of the sixth and
seventh stages.

Everything that is worthwhile and valuable in life is rejected;
everything that is useless and nonsense is accepted. Prolonged residence
in the cosmic system causes a complete reversal of all mandates, all
priorities, and all norms and standards related to the plan of God.

Christian degeneracy reaches its peak in reverse process reversionism.
The believer in reverse process reversionism cannot be distinguished in
any way from an unbeliever, though he cannot lose his salvation.

In reverse process reversionism, degeneracy is defined as decline from
the normal standards of the plan of God. Therefore, the believer
retrogresses into below normal stages of reversionism, and totally
reverts from the divine standards found in the Word of God.

-   The believer in moral degeneracy declines from the normal standards
    of the plan, and sinks into such sub-normal standards of
    self-fragmentation, polarized fragmentation of legalism, and
    continues through the stages of reversionism.

-   The believer in immoral degeneracy declines from the normal
    standards of the plan, and sinks into the sub-normal standards of
    self-fragmentation, polarized fragmentation of antinomianism, and
    continues through the stages of reversionism.

-   “Reverse process” means to face in the opposite direction either
    spiritually, mentally or physically.

Reverse process reversionism is an inverted position of degeneracy by
the reversal of objects. Bona fide objects of love and priorities which
include doctrine, personal love for God the Father, occupation with
Christ, having a right pastor, right spouse, and right friends are all
reversed. In reverse process reversionism, pseudo-love objects replace
Biblical priorities.

The believer reverses the objects of his love, attention, concentration,
and priorities. Reverse process reversionism is characterized by the
reversal of love objects. Rev 2:4-5 describes this as “leaving your
first love.” “But I hold this against you [believers], for you have
abandoned your first love. Therefore, recall to mind from where you have
fallen, and change your mind [rebound], and execute the most important
production [execution of the plan of God]. Otherwise, I am coming to
you, and I will remove your lamp stand [dying discipline].”

-   The first love refers to the Lord Jesus Christ as both the living
    Word and the written Word or doctrine.

-   Reverse process reversionism leaves a true object and gravitates
    toward a pseudo-love object. The believer in reverse process
    reversionism rejects everything related to true love and God. His
    standards are antithetical to those of Bible doctrine.

-   He seeks his own personal glory instead of love of God. He seeks any
    false lover instead of his right woman. He seeks anyone who can help
    him or that he can use, instead of true friends.

-   He has a total reversal of all true objects of love.

Christian degeneracy blots out and reverses all of the mandates, all of
the norms and standards, and all of the doctrinal understanding of three
Biblical categories.

-   The laws of divine establishment.

-   Salvation by grace through faith.

-   The plan of God for the Church Age.

### Seven characteristics of reverse process reversionism

1. Prolonged residence in the cosmic system is the inevitable result of
unchecked fragmentation, which is parlayed into reversionism.

2. The believer in this stage is described in several ways.

-   The enemy of God, Jas 4:4.

-   The enemy of the cross, Phil 3:18.

-   A hater of God, Jn 15:23.

-   Spiritual schizophrenia, “double minded,” James 4:8.

-   Anti or against Christ, 1 Jn 2:18,22, 4:3; 2 Jn 7.

-   Disciple of the devil, 1 Jn 3:8,10.

3. Reverse process reversionism is a status quo of unrestrained and
perpetual sinfulness, fragmentation, reversionism, and extensive cosmic
involvement. This believer is brainwashed by satanic propaganda.

4. The manifestations of reverse process reversionism are many. The
believer branches out into the various categories of reversionistic
activity.

-   Legalistic fragmentation or polarized legalism becomes reversionism,
    Col 2:16-18; Heb 5:11-6:16.

-   Phallic fragmentation or polarized antinomianism becomes
    reversionism, 2 Cor 12:21; Eph 4:19, 5:5; Col 3:5; Rev 2:14, 20-23.

-   Ascetic fragmentation becoming reversionism is characterized by
    self-sacrifice and the Trappist monk syndrome, 1 Tim 4:5

-   Mental attitude arrogance becomes reversionism and locked-in
    arrogance, 1 Tim 6:4,17.

-   Monetary fragmentation becomes reversionism, Jas 4:13-14, 5:1-6; Rev
    3:14-20; Eccl 5:10-16.

-   Drug addiction and alcoholic fragmentation becomes reversionism, Isa
    28:1, 7-9; Gal 5:20.

-   Anti-establishment fragmentation becoming reversionism is seen in
    those who reject such establishment principles as free enterprise,
    freedom through military victory, the divine institutions of family,
    home, and the true function of government. Such believers do not
    understand that freedom without authority is anarchy, and authority
    without freedom is tyranny, Rom 1:18-32.

-   Verbal fragmentation becomes reversionism, James 5:9,12.

-   Psychotic fragmentation becomes reversionism, 1 Pet 2:15-19.

-   National reversionism, Hos 4:1-6.

Biblical Nomenclature for Reversionism.
---------------------------------------

Gal 5:4, “drifting off course from grace.”

Phil 3:18, “the enemy of the cross.”

Jer 9:25-26, “uncircumcised of heart.”

Heb 12:15, “falling from grace” means total malfunction of any grace
modus operandi, and total ignorance of the grace policy of God in the
plan.

2 Pet 2:7-8, “the tortured soul.”

2 Pet 2:14, “the unstable soul.”

Rev 2:5, “fallen.”

Rev 2:4, “left your first love.”

Rev 3:15-16, “lukewarm.”

1 Tim 1:19, “shipwrecked.”

John 15:23, “He who hates Me [Jesus Christ], also hates My Father.”

1 Pet 5:8, “Your adversary, the devil, prowls about like a roaring lion,
seeking someone to devour.”

“Devouring” is accomplished when you change your priorities by reverse
process reversionism.

2 Tim 2:26, “they have entered the devil’s trap.”

Profile of the Reversionist,
----------------------------

Psalm 7:14-16.

Psalm 7:14, "Behold, he shall have labor pains of vanity because he has
become pregnant with frustration. Therefore, he has given birth to a
life of deceit

Labor pains of vanity describe the many sins in the arrogance complex.
Labor pains of vanity result in distraction, the first stage of
reversionism.

To become pregnant with frustration describes the first three stages of
reverse process reversionism.

The life of deceit describes the last four stages of reversionism:
permanent negative volition toward Bible doctrine, blackout of the soul,
scar tissue of the soul, and reverse process reversionism.

The use of male pronouns in a pregnancy and birth illustration is
sanctified sarcasm in the Hebrew.

Psalm7:15, “He has dug a grave and he has explored it; therefore, he has
fallen into the pit which he made.”

Digging a grave refers to self-fragmentation by pulling the pin of the
grenade. First you frag yourself, and then you polarize in your
fragmentation according to the trend of your sin nature.

Digging a grave refers to implosion, wherein you answer the call of
temptation from your sin nature. Then you explode or fragment. Digging
the grave refers to the first four stages of reversionism.

Exploring the grave you dug refers to the last four stages of
reversionism.

Falling into the pit or hold refers to believer degeneracy. He has made
it himself by his own self-determination. This believer will eventually
die the sin unto death.

Psalm 7:16, “His frustration will return on his own head; and his
violence will descend on the crown of his own head.”

Reversionism leads to the destruction of the client nation,
-----------------------------------------------------------

Hos 4:1-6.

Hos 4:1, “Hear the word of the Lord, you citizens of Israel [Northern
Kingdom of Israel as a client nation to God], because the Lord has a
[legal] case against the inhabitants of the client nation; because
nothing of doctrine is being taught, and nothing of grace is being
applied. There is no knowledge of God.”

Hos 4:2, “Instead, there is lying [dishonesty, lack of integrity and
virtue], deception, murder, rape; therefore, violence [criminal violence
and terrorism].”

Hos 4:3, “Consequently, the land mourns and all who live in it languish
[loss of strength and dynamics], along with domestic animals [birds,
fish].”

Hos 4:4, “Yet let no one find fault; let no one offer criticism. For
your citizens are like those who are contending with doctrinal
communicators [Levitical priesthood].”

Hos 4:5, “Therefore, you have stumbled in the daylight, and even the
false prophet will stumble with you in night darkness, and I will
destroy your mother [client nation].”

-   The daylight refers to clear doctrinal teaching, to great warnings
    from both prophets and priests alike. The people had heard the truth
    and had been warned, yet they stumbled in that daylight. They
    stumble even as they see the problem.

-   The false prophet is worse than the people. He is in darkness and
    reversionism, knowing no doctrine at all. He’s in total reversionism
    in night darkness.

Hos 4:6, “My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. Because you
have rejected knowledge [of doctrine], I will reject you from being a
priest [client] nation. Since you have neglected the doctrine of your
God, I, even I, will neglect your sons.”

-   Sons refers to the next generation, which would become enslaved
    after the destruction of the client nation.

-   This client nation of the Northern Kingdom of Israel was destroyed
    by the Assyrians in 721 B.C.

Evil is a major factor in the function of reversionism.
-------------------------------------------------------

Remember that God is holy, which means God has perfect integrity.

The integrity of God demands the perpetuation of the human race until
the course of history and the prehistoric angelic conflict have both
been completed.

Since the fall of mankind in the Garden, Satan has replaced man as the
ruler of this world.

The policies of Satan as the ruler of this world are called “Evil.” Evil
comes in many forms, both sweetness and light as well as darkness and
terror.

The policy of God is revealed only in the Word of God. The policy of God
is Grace.

The two antagonistic forces of grace and evil have preexisted the
creation of the human race and the beginning of human history. Now they
continue in human history.

The absolute truths of Bible doctrine versus the relative concepts of
Satan are always at war on the battlefield of human history.

Relative truth versus absolute truth is as part of the angelic conflict,
now perpetuated in human history.

Bible doctrine portrays the grace plan of God, while evil reveals the
genius of Satan’s administration of the rulership of this world.

Satan’s policy of evil includes sin and human good, immoral and moral
degeneracy, and all the sins of arrogance.

Therefore, evil is a major factor in the function of reversionism.

See Topic: Evil

Illustrations of Reversionism.
------------------------------

In Rev 3:14-21, believers became involved in gnosticism and grew
lukewarm toward the Lord.

In the story of Hosea and Gomer, Gomer ran off with a prince of Israel
in her reversionism.

Jeremiah had to buy his right woman from slavery after she had become a
prostitute.

James 2:1-5 presents the case of the short-sighted usher who gave the
rich man the best seat.

In 2 Cor 10:10-11, the Corinthians rejected Paul, their right pastor,
for the Judaizers.

Paul’s reversionism occurred when he went to Jerusalem, even though he
was warned by the Spirit not to go. This cost him four years in prison.

David’s reversionism with Bathsheba and murder of her husband, Uriah the
Hittite, cost him the death of a child, the rape of a daughter, the
death of his favorite son, and a revolution in his kingdom.

Elijah’s fear of being murdered and not trusting in the protection of
the Lord was his manifestation of reversionism.

The Warnings and Mandates to Avoid Reversionism.
------------------------------------------------

The warning to avoid reversionism is found in

2 Jn 7-“Because many deceivers have gone out into the world who do not
acknowledge Jesus Christ as coming in the flesh. This person is the
deceiver and an antichrist. Look out for yourselves, that you may not
lose your momentum which you have accomplished, but that you might
receive a full reward. No one has fellowship with God who keeps
advancing out of bounds and does not remain on the playing field through
the doctrine of Christ. He who resides in the divine dynasphere by means
of doctrine, this same one keeps on having fellowship with both the
Father and the Son.”

1 Tim 3:6, “Do not be an immature believer, lest having received blind
arrogance [self-fragmentation], you fall into the condemnation of the
devil [explosion and reversion].”

The mandate to avoid reversionism is found in

1 John 2:1, “Stop loving the cosmic system, or anything pertaining to
the cosmic system.”

Characteristics of Reversionism.
--------------------------------

Reversionism concentrates on false teaching, and therefore possesses the
spirit of error, 1 Jn 4:5-People in reversionism will always believe the
lie, false doctrine, gossip, or anything else that is untrue.

Reversionism contaminates others.

Heb 12:15, “See to it that no one falls back from the grace of God, that
no root of bitterness sprouting up causes trouble, and through this many
be contaminated.”

Reversionism causes the believer to lose his escrow blessings for both
time and eternity,

Heb 3:10-12.

Reversionism leads to perversion,

Rom 1:26-27.

Reversionism produces national disintegration,

Rom 1:29-32

Hos 4:1-6.

The cosmic system is a trap for the development of reversionism.
----------------------------------------------------------------

2 Cor. 2:11, “In order that no advantage be taken of us by Satan, for we
are not ignorant of his schemes.”

Eph 4:27, “Do not be giving opportunity to the devil.”

1 Tim 3:6-7, “fall into the snare of the devil.”

2 Tim 2:26, “that they should come to their senses.”

Gal 5:4, “you have drifted off course from grace.”

Discipline for Reversionism.
----------------------------

. In stages one through four of reversionism, the believer receives
warning discipline. This discipline may come in the form of either
adversity or prosperity. For example, you may have love and then have it
removed. This is the warning discipline of Rev 3:20 and Jas 5:9.

In stages five through seven, the believer receives intensified
discipline, Psalm 38:1ff; 2 Thess 2:11.

In stage eight, the believer receives dying discipline or the sin unto
death, Jer 9:16, 44:12; Phil 3:18-19; Rev 3:16; 1 Cor 10:13-14; Psalm
118:17-18; 1 John 5:16.

Reversionism intensifies suffering, Ps 77:1-10.

Reversionism was a major subject of the writer of Hebrews to the Christians living in Israel.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

. The believers who received the book of Hebrews were in reversionism,
Heb 5:11-14.

Reversion recovery is impossible apart from the daily metabolization of
basic doctrine, Heb 6:1-3.

Reversion recovery is impossible when religious reversionism is
perpetuated in the life, Heb 6:4-6.

====================

