---
title: Satan
layout: lesson
---


**Satan**

**Satan**

Satan is an angelic personality. He is one of the most beautiful
creatures. He has no red skin or horns, no trident or pitchfork and he
does not breathe fire and brimstone. In fact, fire and brimstone make
him shudder, because he is condemned to the lake of fire mentioned in
Matt. 25:41. Satan is more intelligent than any human. His name,
Lucifer, means great shining light or son of the morning.

A portrait of Satan and his personality are given by Eze. 28:11-19 and
Isa. 14:12-17.

1.  The Five I Will’s of Satan Are from Isa. 14:12-17
    -------------------------------------------------

“I will ascend into heaven”, a reference to the throne room of God.
Satan wanted to take over God’s place.

“I will exalt my throne above the stars of God.” Satan wanted to rule
angels.

Rev. 12:3, 4

“I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation in the sides of the
north.” Satan wanted to rule over the earth.

“I will ascend above the heights of the clouds.” Or, “I will be
supreme.” He desired to displace God as the sovereign of the universe.

“I will be like the most High.” Satan’s power lust; “I will be God.”

Satan is called the father of lies and a murderer, John 8:44. He is the
highest authority in the cosmos, Eph. 2:2. Even Michael the archangel is
no match for Satan, Daniel 10:3.

Satan’s Three Falls

Satan fell first at the point of negative volition toward the
sovereignty of God, during the five I will’s; Isa. 14:12-17; Eze. 28:15.

Satan’s second fall will occur at the middle of the tribulation when he
is denied access to heaven. Rev. 12:9; Eze. 28:15.

At the end of the millennial reign of Christ, Satan will be cast into
the lake of fire. This will be his final fall. Matt. 25:41; Rev. 20:10;
Eze. 28:18.

Satan is the ruler of this world

Luke 4:5-7

John 12:31; 14:30; 16:11

2 Cor. 4:4

Eph. 2:2

As the ruler of this world, Satan has a strategy regarding the nations.
Satan’s desire is to neutralize the divine institutions by means of the
destruction of nations. Therefore, Satan is anti nationalistic and pro
United Nations, pro World Council of Churches and pro Communist.

Rev. 12:9; 20:3, 8

Bible truth is Satan’s greatest enemy and is the source of the most
powerful attack on his kosmos. Therefore, Satan has designed revolution
to neutralize nationalism which is protective of the word of God.

Satan’s Strategy with Unbelievers

Every human being is born spiritually dead, hence is born as a member of
the kingdom of Satan. Satan has a strategy regarding every person to
keep that person from accepting Jesus Christ as savior. He tries to
blind unbelievers to the gospel.

2 Cor. 4:3, 4

Luke 8:12

2 Thess. 2:9, 10

The unbeliever is made blind to gospel information by being distracted
by Satan and by exercising negative volition toward the word of God.
Satan does not force anyone to be lost, he uses every means to steer the
unbeliever away from the truth. His ultimate weapons in this are
religion and humanism. He tries to promote the glorification and
deification of mankind while downgrading God Himself. Gen. 3:5; Col. 2:8

Satan’s Strategy with Believers

Satan does not give up when a person accepts Christ as saviour. He has a
strategy regarding believers which is very subtle and far-reaching.

**Satan accuses believers before God**. The sins of the Christian are
observed by the fallen angels and reported. In effect, a dossier is
being kept on each believer. He does this to try to hinder the work of
God on earth. However, 1 John 2:1ff points out that Jesus Christ is our
advocate with the Father; and the Lord reminds the Father of what
happened at the cross and makes note of the believer’s faith and
position in Christ.

Rev. 12:9, 10

Zech. 3:1, 2

Job 1:6-11

2 Cor. 2:11

**Satan tries to keep the believer from the word of God.** He encourages
Christians to ignore the word and accept false teaching so that they
will revert to their former manner of life.

1 Tim. 4:1

1 Cor. 10:19-21

2 Cor. 11:3, 13-15

**Satan distracts by trying to keep believers from public assembly
worship**, Heb. 10:25. He tempts the believer with an improper emphasis
on details of life such as money, success, social life, pleasure, loved
ones, health, sex, materialistic things or status symbols. The mature
believer knows that his happiness is not derived from these things, so
he is not a slave to them. The novice Christian, however, may try to
gain happiness from such things, and this will distract him from the
word of God.

**False teaching is a part of Satan’s strategy**. The following are some
of the characteristics of false teachers:

• They have a false facade. Matt. 7:15; Rom. 16:18.

• They court believers. Gal. 4:17, 18; 2 Tim. 3:5, 7.

• They appeal to human pride. 2 Cor. 10:12

• They promote idolatry because it is a quick way to demon influence.
Hab. 2:18, 19

• They promote legalism. 1 Tim. 1:7, 8

• The false teachers will continue to operate throughout Satan’s rule on
earth. 1 John 4:1

**Satan seeks to frustrate the will of God for the believer**. There are
three categories of the will of God which Satan tries to interdict.

• The operational will of God or what God wants us to do.; James 4:7, 8;
Gal. 5:7.

• The mental or intellectual will of God or what God wants us to think.:
1 Tim. 4:1.

• The geographical will of God or where God wants us to be.:, 1 Thess.
2:18.

**Satan encourages believers to worry**. Worry neutralizes the soul of
the believer. He tries to frighten Christians with regard to physical
death.

1 Peter 5:7-9

Heb. 2:14, 15

**Satan attempts to change the focus of the believer**. Instead of
occupation with Christ, Satan wants the Christian to be occupied with:

Self, (Col. 3:1; 1 Cor. 1:10, 11; Gen. 3:4, 5; Matt. 26:31–35)

Things, (Heb. 13:5, 6; 1 Cor. 1:10), and

People,(Jer. 17:5; 1 Kings 19:10).

One of the functions of the faith rest principle is to protect the
Christian in the area of having a proper focus on life.

Emotionalism can lead to great distractions for Christians; so Satan
puts on a big campaign to control people’s emotions. While the emotion
is a bona fide function of the soul, whenever emotion takes precedence
over Bible truth, it leads to distraction. Those who dabble in ecstatic
experiences, public or private, are allowing their feelings and emotions
to outweigh doctrine. Under circumstances of edification and spiritual
growth, emotion is a tremendous generator of happiness. But emotion has
no spiritual meaning or connotation; and emotion cannot be used as a
criterion of spiritual condition.

**Satan also promotes heavily in the area of mental attitude sins** such
as fear, worry, bitterness, desires for revenge, pride, guilt feelings,
lack of love, failure to forgive, hatred, mental adultery and so forth.
A believer is neutralized by sin; and mental attitude sins are behind
all sin. They are the worst category because they are so devastating. As
long as mental attitude sin is taking place, the word of God is being
ignored.

**One of Satan’s main weapons is religion**. The basic aim of religion
is to counterfeit what God is doing. There are several religious
counterfeits mentioned in the Bible.

• A counterfeit gospel, 2 Cor. 11:3, 4

• Counterfeit ministers who are unsaved, humanists, etc.,
2 Cor. 11:13-15

• Counterfeit communion table, 1 Cor. 10:19-21

• Counterfeit righteousness, Matt. 19:16-19

• Counterfeit manner of life like living the beautiful life, Matt. 23

• Counterfeit power, 2 Thess. 2:8-10

• Counterfeit gods, 2 Thess. 2:3, 4

The Bible talks about the armor of God as enabling the believer to stand
against the wiles of the devil. This armor is protection for us while we
live in *kosmos diabolikos*, and the weapons of our warfare are stronger
than Satan as we take our stand in the Lord Jesus Christ.

