---
title: Sexual Health
layout: lesson
---


**Sexual Health 4**

Sexual Health in the Bible

God the Father intends that sexual activity be conducted only between
husband and wife. The Bible takes a categorical and unequivocal stand
against non-marital sex and condemns any other sexual practice.

**Exodus 20:14, “You shall not commit adultery.”**

**Hebrews 13:4, “Let marriage be held in honor among all, and let the
marriage bed be undefiled; for fornicators and adulterers God will
judge.”**

**Judges 16:6, So Delilah said to Samson, “Please tell me where your
great strength is and how you may be bound to afflict you.”**

**Proverbs 6:32, The one who commits adultery is lacking sense; he who
would destroy himself does it.**

God the Father’s Care For Us

A child profits by obeying his parents. A child does not understand many
of life’s problems. A child does not anticipate dangers. A child is not
aware of the potential fallout from his actions.

Parents have experience and wisdom - some gained the hard way, through
making painful mistakes or by committing sins and recovering. But human
parents are sometimes too lax or too strict with children - and
certainly parents do not know everything.

God the Father does know everything about us, and He has an attitude of
perfect love toward us - so He always has our best interests in mind. He
is neither too lax nor too strict. We should trust Him and obey Him
implicitly.

Human society is complex, made up of people who are complex. Each person
has a soul made up of a mental and emotional structure containing areas
of strength and weakness and possessing trends toward morality or
licentiousness, all coupled with a physical nature that is hard to
understand or control.

Society is a matrix of individual complex souls. Each individual is
unique, but there is an underlying common structure in the souls of all
people.

God not only knows everything about us, He also knows all about the
society we live in. He has established in the Bible a perfectly balanced
set of societal standards based on His omniscience and His plan of
grace.

God loves our nation and wants the best for it (as He does for all
nations). His laws concerning marriage, divorce, and sexual activity are
designed to help families and nations prosper, have peace, and function
as a lighthouse of the gospel.

Sexual promiscuity brings harm to everyone concerned - the participants,
their families, the community, and the nation. In the Old Testament
times, both murder and adultery were punishable by death, because both
were crimes that devastated the community and the nation, shown by many
examples, including the well-known case of David and Bathsheba.

God’s Plan for Glorifying Christ

The most important part of God’s plan is that the Lord Jesus Christ be
glorified in the world, so that every human being will have an
opportunity to make a decision to accept Christ as Savior. Therefore,
when we say that Christ is glorified during the Church Age, we are
saying that Christ is the cele­brated Person of the Church Age, the
focus of attention.

For this reason, one of the Holy Spirit’s main functions during the
Church Age is to glorify Christ and to make Him known to all people.

**John 16:13,14,** "But when He, the Spirit of truth, comes, He will
guide you into all the truth; for He will not speak on His own
initiative, but whatever He hears, He will speak; and He will disclose
to you what is to come. He shall glorify Me; for He shall take of Mine,
and shall disclose it to you.

It is also the responsibility of Christians to glorify Christ by their
own lives; and the Holy Spirit provides the power for us to be able to
do that. The believer’s body is the temple of the Holy Spirit, and this
glorification occurs on the inside of the believer.

**1 Cor. 6:19,20** Or do you not know that your body is a temple of the
Holy Spirit who is in you, whom you have from God, and that you are not
your own? For you have been bought with a price: therefore glorify God
in your body.

One of the most important and effective ways to glorify Christ is in
Christian marriage. Marriage is a picture of the relationship of the
Lord Jesus Christ to His Bride, the Church, the Body of Christ,
including all Christians. Christ loves Christians and provides
everything for them. It is imperative that believers and non-Christians
be able to have a clear picture of this relationship, and Christian
marriage is one of the clearest illustrations of God’s Plan on view
during the Church Age.

Christian marriage, properly constituted and upheld, glorifies the Lord
Jesus Christ and is a powerful witness of the gospel to an unbelieving
world. The following Bible passages are very important to understanding
this concept.

**Eph. 5:22-33,** Wives, be subject to your own husbands, as to the
Lord.

For the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ also is the head of
the church, He Himself {being} the Savior of the body.

But as the church is subject to Christ, so also the wives {ought to be}
to their husbands in everything.

Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ also loved the church and gave
Himself up for her;

that He might sanctify her, having cleansed her by the washing of water
with the word,

that He might present to Himself the church in all her glory, having no
spot or wrinkle or any such thing; but that she should be holy and
blameless.

husbands ought also to love their own wives as their own bodies. He who
loves his own wife loves himself;

for no one ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it,
just as Christ also {does} the church,

because we are members of His body.

For this cause a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall cleave
to his wife; and the two shall become one flesh\\

This mystery is great; but I am speaking with reference to Christ and
the church.

Nevertheless let each individual among you also love his own wife even
as himself; and {let} the wife {see to it} that she respect her husband.

Anything that sullies this godly illustration, anything that clouds the
issue for those might be saved, is wrong and is strongly condemned in
the Bible.

Read these additional Bible examples of marriage as a figure of Christ’s
Union with the Church.

**Isa. 54:4 -6** "Fear not, for you will not be put to shame; Neither
feel humiliated, for you will not be disgraced; But you will forget the
shame of your youth, And the reproach of your widowhood you will
remember no more.

"For your husband is your Maker, Whose name is the Lord of hosts; And
your Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel, Who is called the God of all
the earth.

“For the Lord has called you, Like a wife forsaken and grieved in
spirit, Even like a wife of one’s youth when she is rejected,” Says your
God.

**Isa. 62:1-5,** For Zion’s sake I will not keep silent, And for
Jerusalem’s sake I will not keep quiet, Until her righteousness goes
forth like brightness, And her salvation like a torch that is burning.

And the nations will see your righteousness, And all kings your glory;
And you will be called by a new name, Which the mouth of the Lord will
designate.

You will also be a crown of beauty in the hand of the Lord, And a royal
diadem in the hand of your God.

t will no longer be said to you, “Forsaken,” Nor to your land will it
any longer be said, “Desolate”; But you will be called, “My delight is
in her,” And your land, “Married”; For the Lord delights in you, And to
Him your land will be married.

For as a young man marries a virgin, So your sons will marry you; And as
the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, So your God will rejoice over
you.

**Hos. 2:18-23,** "In that day I will also make a covenant for them With
the beasts of the field, The birds of the sky, And the creeping things
of the ground. And I will abolish the bow, the sword, and war from the
land, And will make them lie down in safety.

"And I will betroth you to Me forever; Yes, I will betroth you to Me in
righteousness and in justice, In lovingkindness and in compassion,

And I will betroth you to Me in faithfulness. Then you will know the
Lord.

“And it will come about in that day that I will respond,” declares the
Lord. I will respond to the heavens, and they will respond to the earth,

And the earth will respond to the grain, to the new wine, and to the
oil, And they will respond to Jezreel.

“And I will sow her for Myself in the land. I will also have compassion
on her who had not obtained compassion, And I will say to those who were
not My people, ‘You are My people!’ And they will say, ‘Thou art my
God!’”

**Rev. 19:6-9**, And I heard, as it were, the voice of a great multitude
and as the sound of many waters and as the sound of mighty peals of
thunder, saying, "Hallelujah! For the Lord our God, the Almighty,
reigns.

“Let us rejoice and be glad and give the glory to Him, for the marriage
of the Lamb has come and His bride has made herself ready.”

And it was given to her to clothe herself in fine linen, bright and
clean; for the fine linen is the righteous acts of the saints.

And he said to me, “Write, ‘Blessed are those who are invited to the
marriage supper of the Lamb.’” And he said to me, “These are true words
of God.”

Definitions

In the Bible the word **adultery** refers to sexual relations by a
married person with someone other than a spouse. The word
**fornication** refers to other sexual relations between unmarried
people and to sexual relations in the heathen temples in which the sex
act was made a form of religion. In this article the word
**promiscuity** refers to both adultery and fornication as well as
homosexual activity.

*Normal* adultery is sex outside of marriage with a person of the
opposite sex. *Abnormal* adultery refers to all other non-marital sexual
activity, including incest, homosexuality, bestiality, molestation of
children.

Sex outside of marriage is a meaningless physical encounter. And abuse
of sex can mean maladjustment to God, to the human race, and many other
maladjustments in life.

Sex was designed by God for the propagation of the human race and to be
an expression of love inside a marriage, between husband and wife.

As a detail of married life, sex provides only momentary happiness or
pleasure. Sex is not love. It is a ritual which expresses love and the
coalescence of the soul and body. Sex is an expression of happiness, not
a source of happiness.

Three types of adultery are mentioned in the Bible - physical adultery,
mental adultery, and spiritual adultery.

Physical adultery

**Ex. 20:14**, “Thou shalt not commit adultery.”

Mental adultery

**Matt. 5:27,28**, “You have heard that it was said by them of old time,
Thou shalt not commit adultery. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks
on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in
his heart.”

Spiritual adultery

**James 4:4,** “You adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the
friendship of the world is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be
a friend of the world is the enemy of God.”

**Hos. 4:12-15,** My people consult their wooden idol, and their
diviner’s wand informs them; For a spirit of harlotry has led them
astray, And they have played the harlot, departing from their God.

They offer sacrifices on the tops of the mountains And burn incense on
the hills, Under oak, poplar, and terebinth, Because their shade is
pleasant. Therefore your daughters play the harlot, And your brides
commit adultery.

I will not punish your daughters when they play the harlot Or your
brides when they commit adultery, For the men themselves go apart with
harlots And offer sacrifices with temple prostitutes; So the people
without understanding are ruined.

Though you, Israel, play the harlot, Do not let Judah become guilty;
Also do not go to Gilgal, Or go up to Beth-aven, And take the oath: “As
the Lord lives!”

**Judges 2:17**, And yet they did not listen to their judges, for they
played the harlot after other gods and bowed themselves down to them.
They turned aside quickly from the way in which their fathers had walked
in obeying the commandments of the Lord; they did not do as their
fathers.

Ephesians 4:17-19 is a strong description of people who have ignored God
entirely in their lives and have given themselves over to sexual sins
and other forms of unclean living. The Apostle Paul warns Christians
against falling into the same patterns of living. The heathen, beginning
with spiritual adultery (unfaithfulness to God), develops a life totally
devoted to sinful behavior. The result is frustration and a frantic
scramble for sexual experience and a search for happiness in misuse of
these details of life.

Prohibitions of Promiscuity

**Deut 5:18,** You shall not commit adultery.

**1 Cor. 6:18-20** Flee immorality. Every {other} sin that a man commits
is outside the body, but the immoral man sins against his own body.

Or do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit who is
in you, whom you have from God, and that you are not your own?

For you have been bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your
body.

**1 Thess. 4:3** For this is the will of God, your sanctification; that
is, that you abstain from sexual immorality;

Fornication is forbidden in 1 Cor 6:18 (above). Fornication is sex
between two people who are not married. These verses point out that the
Lord expects you to pick yourself up and run away from the opportunity
for fornication.

Even mental adultery is prohibited.

**Matt. 5:27,28** "You have heard that it was said, ’You shall not
commit adultery,

but I say to you, that everyone who looks on a woman to lust for her has
committed adultery with her already in his heart.

Man gets an image in his mind and his emotion takes over causing mental
adultery. The remedy is to make sure these temptations do not take root,
or if they do, to recognize the sin, confess it, and apply doctrine to
the situation.

In actual physical adultery, the soul makes a decision and the body
follows through. In mental adultery, only the volition or the soul is
involved.

**Incest is prohibited**: Lev 18:6-17, 20:14; Deut 27:20,22; 1 Cor
5:1-7.

**Homosexuality is prohibited**:

**Lev. 18:22** You shall not lie with a male as one lies with a female;
it is an abomination.

**Lev. 20:13** If a man lies with a male as those who lie with a woman,
both of them have committed a detestable act; they shall surely be put
to death. Their bloodguiltiness is upon them.

**Rom. 1:26,27** For this reason God gave them over to degrading
passions; for their women exchanged the natural function for that which
is unnatural,

and in the same way also the men abandoned the natural function of the
woman and burned in their desire toward one another, men with men
committing indecent acts and receiving in their own persons the due
penalty of their error.

**Bestiality is forbidden**: Lev 18:23, 20:15. Animal and man were both
killed in punishment. Deut 27:21.

**Prostitution is forbidden**: Lev 19:29; Deut 23:17.

**Rape is forbidden and punishable by death**: Deut 22:25-27.

**Additional Relevant Scriptures**

Prov. 5:1-6; Prov. 6:23-35; Job 24:14-16; 1 Thess. 4:3-8; Prov. 7:10-23;
1 Chron. 5:25,26; Eze. 23:35-37; Eze. 18:1-32; Prov. 6:23-35; 2 Pet.
2:9-18; 1 Cor. 6:13-20

