---
title: Sin
layout: lesson
---


**Sin 11**

**The Doctrine of Sin**

DEFINITION AND OBJECTIVES
=========================

The Bible uses the word “sin” to refer to any activity or pattern of
thinking that is independent of God’s standards or of His provisions for
human life. God loves you, and He has your best interests in mind all
the time. Because He has always known what is best for any individual,
and for our communities and nation, He has laid out standards by which
people can have lives of great happiness and productivity. These
standards are known as the Plan of God, or the Christian Way of Life.

Because it is so important that people adjust themselves to the Plan of
God, the subject of sin is found in most Bible passages in some form.
These authoritative declarations of the Word of God are in stark
contrast to the relativism and permissiveness of modern society.

This study deals categorically with many of the specific sin areas which
are dealt with in the Bible. The problem of personal sin in discussed in
detail with the objective of providing the Christian believer with
information about how to have personal victory over sin in the life.

You may want to read this paper through fairly quickly, at first, in
order to get an overview of the subject matter. But to get the most out
of a study like this, you should read and meditate upon each Bible
passage cited in this paper, using the comments as study aids. By
studying as much as possible about God’s standards, and His plan for
living the Christian life, you can learn how to profit as much as
possible from a close walk with the Lord, while being hindered as little
as possible by the consequences of acts of personal sin.

You can gain victory over the dominating influence of sin by becoming
skilled in the mechanics of Christian living. Victorious Christian
living requires the regular intake of Bible truth and the constant
filling and control of the Holy Spirit. As you grow in grace, you become
an “edified” believer, and your life begins to “conform to the image of
Christ”. This spiritual growth is the basis for victory over sin.

THE SEQUENCE OF SIN
===================

In the Bible, sin is discussed under three types. The first type of sin
is called Imputed Sin. This is the concept that, when Adam sinned, the
whole human race sinned. Thus, when Adam was counted guilty, every human
being shares his guilt. These things are mentioned in 1 Cor. 15:22; Rom.
5:12; and Rom. 3:23.

The second part of the sin “package” is known as Inherited Sin. Adam
acquired a Sin Nature when he sinned. Since then, every human being has
inherited a Sin Nature at the time of birth – we are born sinners. Rom.
5:12; Psalm 51:5. The Sin Nature is described in detail in Section 2.0.

Third, the result of having a Sin Nature is that each person leads a
life in which he commits Personal Sins, both before and after being born
again. These personal sins are the result and manifestation of the Sin
Nature and occur whenever a person decides to think or act independently
of the will of the Father.

CHRIST’S WORK REGARDING SIN
===========================

The Lord Jesus Christ bore the penalty for all the sin of the human
race, including each aspect of sin mentioned in the previous section.

As far as Imputed Sin is concerned, although in Adam we are counted
“guilty” and spiritually dead, in Jesus Christ we are counted “not
guilty” and spiritually alive. 1 Cor. 15:22; Eph 2:1,5,6.

The problem of Inherited Sin was also dealt with at the Cross, as Jesus
died to provide for the Sin Nature. 1  John 1:7. Human good, which is a
product of the Sin Nature, was rejected at the Cross, making salvation
and all other spiritual benefits to be total products of the Grace of
God, “not of works lest any man should boast”. Eph. 2:8,9; Rom. 4:4;
6:10.

And, Christ bore everyone’s personal sins (1 John 2:2) because He was
judged for the sins of the whole world. His spiritual death on the Cross
was substituted for our spiritual death, making it possible for anyone
to become spiritually alive. The sin issue is resolved for all of us by
the work of Christ. So the issue for anyone is simply faith in Christ
and in His finished work of salvation. John 3:18,36.

THE SLAVE MARKET OF SIN
=======================

A person is born into the world spiritually dead because of the sin
passed on through human procreation. Rom. 5:12. The sin of Adam is
imputed to all mankind. 1 Cor. 15:22. There are three categories of
people in the world, all of whom are born in sin and all of whom have
sinful natures. They are: (1) the immoral person, Rom. 1:18-32; (2) the
moral person, Rom. 2:1-6 and Isa. 64:6; and (3) the religious person,
Rom. 2:17-29 and 4:4.

Every human being is born into the slave market of sin, according to
John 8:34,35 and Gal. 3:31. The Law cannot free a person from the slave
market of sin. Only a free man can free a slave. Jesus Christ was born
free from sin, without a sin nature, and He never committed personal
sin. 2 Cor. 5:21. He was therefore a free man and not in the slave
market with us.

The Lord Jesus Christ purchased us from the slave market of sin and set
us free. 1 Pet. 1:18,19; 1 Cor. 6:20; Eph. 1:7. The gate to the slave
market has been removed for all people; but actual freedom depends on
whether the individual exercises his free will in accepting the offer of
freedom. The only way out of the slave market of sin is through Jesus
Christ. John 14:6; 8:36

THE SIN NATURE
==============

The Sin Nature is that part of the essence of the soul acquired at
Adam’s fall and subsequently passed on to every person at birth. The Sin
Nature is the center of the soul’s rebellion against God. The essence of
the soul contains:

• Self-consciousness

• Mentality

• Volition

• Emotion

• The Sin Nature

The Essence of the Sin Nature
-----------------------------

The Sin Nature has an “area” of strengths in which human good is
produced, that is, those good deeds and thoughts which are acceptable to
man but which are unacceptable to God for purposes of salvation or
spiritual growth. Isa. 64:6; Rom. 8:8. In the Bible, human good is
contrasted with divine good, which is the work produced by the Spirit of
God in the life of a believer who is walking in daily fellowship with
the Lord under the control of the Holy Spirit.

The Sin Nature also has an “area” of weakness which directs the
production of all personal sin. Heb. 12:1. Three types of personal sin
are produced here: mental attitude sins, sins of the tongue, and open
sinful activity.

The Sin Nature has patterns of lusts, or desires, the basic motivators
of all the activities of human life. The basic drives include the desire
for power, approbation, ego satisfaction, sexual satisfaction, material
satisfaction, and so forth.

The Sin Nature has a system of trends, or inclinations, which vary among
individuals. Some people have an inclination toward immorality or
lasciviousness. Rom. 1. Others have trends toward morality or
asceticism. Either trend is a product of Sin Nature activity.

Bible Synonyms for the Sin Nature
---------------------------------

There are several terms used in scripture to refer to what is known as
the Sin Nature.

Sin (in the singular) – Ps. 51:5; Rom. 5:12; 7:14; 1 John 1:8.

Flesh – the emphasis here is on the location of the Sin Nature in the
“flesh” or life of the individual. Rom. 8:8; 7:18; 13:14; Gal. 5:16-21;
Eph. 2.3.

Old Man – referring to the believer’s former manner of life as an
unbeliever. Eph. 4:22; Col.   3:5–9.

Heart – in some usages the word “heart” refers to a facet of the soul
which is the source of sin. Jer. 17:9; Mt. 12:34; 15:19; Mark 7:21-23;
Ps. 58:2-5.

Carnality – derived from the Latin for “flesh”. Rom. 7:14; 8:6-8; 1 Cor.
3:1-3.

Principles Related to the Sin Nature
------------------------------------

The Sin Nature is the source of spiritual death. Rom. 5:12; Eph. 2:1,5.

The Sin Nature is perpetuated in human beings through physical birth.
Ps. 51:5; 1 Tim. 2:13,14. The believer continues to have his Sin Nature
after salvation. 1 Cor. 3:1; 1 John 1:8. The believer under the control
of the Sin Nature is called “carnal”. Rom. 7:14; 1 Cor. 3:1ff

The Sin Nature frustrates the production of divine good. Rom. 7:15.

The Sin Nature is not found in the believer’s resurrection body. 1 Cor.
15:56; Phil. 3:21; Col. 3:4; 1 Thess. 5:23.

Solutions to the Problem of the Sin Nature
------------------------------------------

God has arranged to provide all that is needed to deal with the problems
caused by the Sin Nature in a believer’s life. The personal sins of the
individual were borne by Jesus Christ on the Cross. 1 Pet. 2:24. These
sins will never be mentioned again because they have already been judged
in Christ. Rev. 20:12.

Furthermore, Jesus Christ rejected the human good produced by the Sin
Nature in terms of its use as “currency” to purchase salvation, Eph.
2:8,9. This made the way clear for God to provide salvation by grace.
The unbeliever will be at the Great White Throne judgment because of his
rejection of this grace provision. Rev. 20:11-15.

The believer’s sins were borne on the Cross by the Lord, as were those
of all people. 2 Cor. 5:21. When a believer sins, Satan accuses him in
heaven. Jesus Christ is our Advocate; He pleads our case, and the case
is thrown out of court.

God has provided confession of sin as a means of restoring the broken
fellowship with God caused by the believer’s personal sin. The believer
can repent and confess and be filled with the Spirit. 1 John 1:9;
Prov. 1:23.

Human good, rejected by Jesus Christ (Eph. 2:8,9), is never acceptable
to God, and it does not produce blessing in the life of the believer. It
is contrary to the principle of Grace, in which God does the work. In
Christian growth, the Holy Spirit provides for the production of divine
good in the believer’s life, through His filling, control, and teaching
functions. God does the giving; man does the receiving.

Legalism is human good production for the purpose of earning and
receiving merit or blessing from God. In Legalism, man does the work and
receives the credit. Therefore, Legalism is a product of the Sin Nature
lust patterns. Under Grace, God does the work and receives the “credit”
(glory). Human good production of the Sin Nature will be judged at the
Judgment Seat of Christ. It is called “wood, hay, and stubble” and will
be burned. The “gold, silver, and precious stones”, of divine good
production of the Holy Spirit, will remain. 1 Cor. 3:10-15

The Hazards of Negative Volition
--------------------------------

The Apostle Paul issued a stern warning to mature Christian believers
living at Ephesus when he told them to beware of falling into a state of
indifference to, or antagonism to, the Word of God. He stated that if
they were to become to become negative to the Lord’s teachings, their
lives would very quickly become indistinguishable from those of
unbelievers in terms of fruitfulness and Christian character.

**Ephesians 4:17-19, “This I say, therefore, and testify in the Lord,
that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity
(emptiness) of their minds, having the understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart: who being past feeling have
given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness.”**

The “darkness” referred to in these verses begins with a negative
disposition toward the Word of God. This volitional decision not to
follow the Scriptures leads immediately to a breakdown in the faith
system of understanding divine viewpoint. There is a cessation in the
spiritual growth process; and there is actually a total reversal in
progress in the Christian life (backsliding, or reversion).

As a result of the lack of divine viewpoint in the soul, the negative
person begins to entertain human standards, human criteria, human
doctrine, human programs – these thing, plus the full gamut of Satanic
doctrine, are substituted for the plan of God. The further result is
subjectivity, unhappiness, and deep frustration in trying to live by
techniques which do not work.

These conditions lead to a frantic search for happiness through details
of life such as riches, friendships, possessions, human approbation,
personal influence and power, and so forth. The believer on this
treadmill is a slave to these details of life rather than being a
servant of the Lord Jesus Christ. While the believer thus engaged is
still “in Christ” positionally, he is actually no better off that an
unbeliever as far as this life is concerned. In fact, he is destined to
be far unhappier than the unbeliever, as will be be shown in the
following paragraphs.

The time, energy, and emotional commitments to this person’s search for
happiness lead to further isolation from the teachings of the Word of
God. He is spending maximum effort to find happiness through other
means. Thus, the very method for reversing the downward trend is
ignored.

During this process, neuroses and psychoses are being developed,
aggravated by the self-induced misery which accompanies chronic and
unmitigated sins of the mind such as pride, jealousy, envy,
vindictiveness, worry, fear, mental adultery, implacability, and the
like, from which there is no relief outside of the plan of God.

Because of these sin patterns, divine discipline is compounded daily.
The believer has a horrible life composed of his own failures, doubled
and re-doubled chastisement, his self-induced unhappiness, and the fact
that he has no defense against the attacks of Satan and his demons. His
“righteousness” (-r) has replaced the righteousness (+R) of God. This
whole miserable situation is avoidable, as you will see with further
study.

MENTAL ATTITUDE SINS
====================

As a believer progresses in his Christian life, he experiences many
profound changes in his thinking. His standards change gradually but
radically; his frame of reference changes; his mental attitude soon
becomes very different from what it once was. His previous way of
thinking is replaced by the “mind of Christ”, and God’s viewpoint is
becoming his own.

The greatest occupational hazard faced by a Christian is the failure to
grow in Christ. Persistent personal sin carried on without repentance
and confession keeps the Christian out of fellowship with the Lord and
hinders the work of the Holy Spirit in the life.

The normal Christian life is a supernatural life. This life cannot be
lived apart from the daily intake of spiritual food, the sustenance
which comes with the study of the Bible accompanied by the continuous
control and ministry of the Holy Spirit. Inattention to the teaching of
the Word of God concerning the mechanics of daily Christian living
results in failure to grow in Christ. The believer who will not overcome
these problems will not be able to enjoy the benefits and blessings of
the Christian life, and he will certainly not be productive as a child
of God.

This section of the study of the topic of Sin reviews several factors
relating to the subject of the believer’s mental attitude. First, we
note several categories of mental attitude sin which are the result of
“not thinking Grace”. Then we see the methods by which God arranges for
human viewpoint thinking to be replaced with divine viewpoint thinking.
This section will also show some of the important results in the life of
the Christian who develops a godly mental attitude.

The Sin of “Not Thinking Grace”
-------------------------------

A Christian decides many times every day whether he will follow God’s
plan for his life. In decisions great or small he expresses either his
dependence on the Lord or his desire to be independent of God’s
direction. A believer has access to the perfect plan of God for his
life, a plan which has certain predetermined divine standards by which
every situation can be measured, by which every decisive opportunity can
be judged. Many promises and blessings are available for use by the
person who orders his life according to the patterns laid out in the
Bible.

The person who is not positive to the plan of God, and who would apply
his own human standards to life situations, does not operate by divine
standards. He becomes involved in a variety of mental attitude sin
problems stemming from his original decision to be independent of God.
His life takes on the characteristics of one who does not “think Grace”.

The Grace of God is that characteristic of His which is an extension of
His love for the human race and which causes Him to provide for every
human need for time and eternity. The sacrificial death of Jesus Christ
on the Cross was the Work which made it possible for God to view every
person as free from the guilt of sin and as an object of God’s Grace
provisions.

Failure to order one’s thinking according to Grace involves several
aspects of mental attitude sin, including the following :

A spirit of pride – this is an exalted feeling based on personal success
or position, or based on good training or education, on personal
appearance, or on some natural gift or ability. Sinful pride is an inner
feeling of self-importance which does not take into account God’s
provision of every resource and quality which goes into one’s human
traits and capabilities.

Love of, or desire for, human approbation and praise – this is a secret
fondness for being noticed and recognized. It is a love of supremacy, or
it is the drawing of attention to oneself by various types of
exhibitionism or by spiritual one-upmanship.

Self will – this is the concept of the stubborn or unteachable nature,
or implacability. Self will is a disposition to be argumentative, harsh,
bitter, which causes one to be a “nit picker” or critical in the
extreme, or to mind the business of others, or to fail to recognize the
rights and privacy of others.

Sinful reaction to social pressures – these are the sins of anger,
impatience, touchiness, or of having a sensitive nature. There is often
resentment and retaliation when disapproved or contradicted. This area
of sin generates jealousy, sour grapes, envy, and the accompanying
bitterness, hatred, carrying of grudges, revenge tactics, and so forth.

Magnifying the faults and failings of others while emphasizing one’s own
virtues.

Negative disposition – this is peevishness, a fretful disposition, one
that loves to be coaxed and honored. It is a dishonest, deceitful
attitude. It is a disposition that tends toward discouragement and
despondency under pressure along with the attempt to solve one’s
problems by hysteria and tantrums.

Apathy – this sin is that of indifference to doctrine and to the Word of
God in general. It is indifferences to the lost condition of unbelievers
or to the carnal condition of other believers.

Characteristics of the Believer’s Mental Attitude
-------------------------------------------------

The true character of a believer in Jesus Christ is determined by his
mental attitude. Prov. 23:7, “As a man thinks in his heart, so is he”.
See also 1 Pet. 1:13; 4:1; Heb. 12:3; Col. 3:1,2; 1 Cor. 2:16; 2 Cor.
10:4,5.

A Christian’s mental attitude is not always apparent in his actions, but
God always knows perfectly what a person is thinking. Heb. 4:12,13;
Prov. 21:2. The following are examples of mental attitude thinking.

Worldliness is a mental attitude. Worldliness is not the doing of
something wrong; it is the thinking which takes place independently of
God’s viewpoint. The remedy to the problem of worldliness is not in
turning over a new leaf. It is a change in thinking (repentance) rather
than a change in activity. Divine viewpoint must replace human viewpoint
before a change in character can be expected. One can have an outward
life which appears good, yet be filled with mental attitude sins. Col.
3:2; James 4:4.

Toughness, strength, and determination are mental attitudes. One is not
beaten until he gives up mentally.

True Christian inner peace is a mental attitude. It is the relaxed
mental state which enables one to enjoy the Christian life regardless of
people or outward circumstances. With a good mental attitude, the
believer can be joyful, relaxed, and can even enjoy the battle.

Mental stability is the result of thinking from a proper frame of
reference, that is, Biblical thinking. The Christian who has mental
fear, who is a chronic worrier, who cannot think clearly under pressure,
who blames others for his problems, who cannot make correct decisions –
that believer is unstable. His emotions interfere with his thinking.
Since emotion always follows thinking, emotional instability will always
follow from incorrect (HVP) thinking. But God’s Plan of Grace leads to
rock-solid mental and emotional stability.

Human vs Divine Viewpoint
-------------------------

Thinking requires words - vocabulary. Divine thinking requires divine
vocabulary. “Man shall not live by bread alone but by every word that
proceeds from the mouth of God.” Under any kind of spiritual pressure,
human vocabulary, or human thinking, is not adequate. Only God’s words
can give the ability to think correctly under pressure. The Christian’s
ability to think correctly is based on how much Bible teaching is
resident (applied) in the soul of the believer.

The Christian is commanded to have a new mental attitude. Col. 3:1,2; 2
Cor. 10:4,5; 1 Cor. 2:16; Phil. 2:5.

The warfare between two viewpoints in the believer’s soul must be fought
from within, first by knowledge of doctrine, and then by the application
of truth to the life. 2 Tim. 2:15; 1 John 1:9.

Every believer has a mind which is capable of looking at life from God’s
point of view. Rom. 1:18 ff. Mental attitude divine viewpoint is
obtained only through Bible study accompanied by the controlling
ministry of the Holy Spirit. The Christian who habitually studies the
Word learns to concentrate and to think from God’s point of view, and
thus he becomes stabilized. The “mind of Christ” (the source of God’s
viewpoint) is made clear in the Bible.

The Christian can be “transformed by the renewing of the mind” through
study, knowledge, and application of Bible truth. By this means his
decisions and actions are most likely to be in agreement with Bible
principle. And this is the only sure sign of Christian maturity and
victorious Christian living.

The Human Conscience
--------------------

The conscience is located in the mind and is the center for the
operating standards of the human soul. Titus 1:15. The conscience
convicts the Christian of evil or wrongdoing. John 8:9. The conscience
establishes standards for both human and divine relationships.
Acts 24:16.

The conscience functions on thinking; and the believer in fellowship has
a conscience which functions from resident (applied) divine viewpoint.
Rom. 2:15; 9:1, as related to applied Bible teaching. The conscience
establishes standards for serving God. 2 Tim. 1:3; Heb. 9:14. But false
operating standards in the conscience produce legalism. 1 Cor. 8:7.

The more the believer uses applied Bible doctrine, the stronger his
conscience becomes in using such thinks as the Law of Liberty and the
superseding laws of love and sacrifice. 1 Cor. 10:24-29. Conscience is
the basis for enduring mistreatment and misunderstanding without
defending oneself. 1 Pet. 2:19; 3:16. The conscience can be damaged or
destroyed with false doctrine and with a calloused soul. 1 Tim. 4:1,2.

The Mechanics of Replacing Human Thinking with Divine Viewpoint
---------------------------------------------------------------

The Christian life is a supernatural life and cannot be lived without
the filling of the Holy Spirit and the daily function of applied Bible
teaching. Rom. 8:2; 7:6; Gal. 5:25; Eph. 5:18. All changes must come
from within, and the Holy Spirit must originate divine good by applying
doctrine to the life.

We begin a change of viewpoint at the moment of salvation. At that time
we changed our mental attitude toward the Lord Jesus Christ. Acts 3:19.
That was repentance and faith, and it resulted in our regeneration.
John 3:16. At that moment many benefits were made available to us,
blessings and promises from God which enable us to live in a manner
which is both acceptable to the Lord and which also produces great
happiness for us. We are given the ability to think those things which
will bring honor to the Lord. Eph. 5:18; 4:23; Col. 3:2.

The choice of whether to make use of the divine operating assets is made
by the believer every day. The power or our walk with the Lord depends
on Bible teaching, the work of the Holy Spirit, and the believer’s
positive volition. Daily Bible teaching under the controlling ministry
of the Holy Spirit builds up divine standards in the human soul and
conscience. 1 Tim. 1:5,19; 3:9.

The Benefits of Having a Proper Mental Attitude
-----------------------------------------------

With the proper mental attitude, the Christian will have victory, peace,
power, and mental stability. Phil. 2:5; 2 Tim. 1:7. The Christian can
experience perfect inner peace, ever during times of difficulty and
suffering. Phil. 4:7. Inner peace comes from what we think. Isa. 26:3.
Divine viewpoint brings mental stability and eliminates discouragement,
anxiety, instability, fearfulness, and double-mindedness. Stability of
mind and character is a mental attitude of strength.

The believer with divine viewpoint has a gracious attitude toward
others. He is a mature believer characterized by mental attitude love
who is a channel of the Grace of God. Deut. 6:5; 11:13. A mental
attitude from DVP produces confidences based on absolute values and
standards. 2 Cor. 5:1,6,8.

Mental Attitude and the Believer’s Ministry
-------------------------------------------

The mature believer “thinks Grace”, which is the “mind of Christ”.
Therefore, the Christian’s life and personality are characterized by
many of the qualities of the life of the Lord Jesus Christ. Rom. 8:29;
Gal. 5:22 ff. In every one of these characteristics the Christian has
one basic ingredient - correct thinking according to divine viewpoint.
1 Pet. 3:8

Therefore, the mature believer is gentle, compassionate, caring, and has
a gracious attitude toward others. These are essential life qualities in
any believer who is a good witness for Christ. With these qualities, and
with the knowledge of the Word of God being acquired on the way to
maturity, the believer cannot help but be an outstanding witness for
Christ and a skilful practitioner in the use of his spiritual gifts.

THE SINS THAT GOD HATES
=======================

In the Bible passage Proverbs 6:16-19 are listed seven things that God
the Father despises. The paragraph cited uses the phrase “an abomination
unto Him” to indicate God’s attitude of repugnance toward the sins
listed there. Four of the sins are sins of the tongue; two are mental
attitude sins; and one sin, murder, is an open sin.

“A proud look” is a sin manifested in the features of the face. This sin
reveals the mental attitude sin of pride, and it refers to arrogance
which is revealed in expression, attitude, and bearing.

“A lying tongue” refers to inveterate, habitual lying.

“Hands that shed innocent blood” refers to murder. It does not refer to
killing in battle, which is bona fide, but to the unlawful taking of a
life.

“A heart that devises wicked imaginations” is a sin in which the mind is
controlled by the emotions with the result that there is the mental
attitude sin of jealousy or suspicion, which cause a person to think the
worst.

“Feet that are swift in running to mischief” refers to sins of the
tongue plus overt sins. It relates to the person who goes out of his way
to make trouble through gossip, maligning, judging, vindictiveness,
tactics of revenge, and any overt tactic which will make trouble for
others.

“A false witness that spreads lies” refers to perjury, another form of
lying. Or, it means to downgrade someone.

“He that soweth discord among the brethren” indicates maligning,
carrying tales, backbiting, destructive criticism, and so forth.

SINS OF THE TONGUE
==================

READ Psalm 64:1-10.

Sins of the tongue have their origin in the Sin Nature. These sins are
among the most devastating of all of the categories of sin. Of the seven
sins mentioned in Proverbs 6:16-19 as being especially hated by God,
three are sins of the tongue. As a Christian believer, you must learn as
much as possible about this type of sin. And you must do everything
possible to gain victory over this in order to be able to make progress
in the Christian Way of Life.

Psalm 34:11-14.

Sins of the tongue are motivated by mental sins such as arrogance,
jealousy, bitterness, vindictiveness, implacability, hatred, mental
adultery, pettiness, envy, guilt feelings, etc. All of these sins are
focused at other people at one time or another. When someone reaches out
to attack another person, the tongue is used to voice the inner mental
sins which are already present. Such talk may be direct and scathing,
even vulgar. Or the talk may be subtle, refined, intellectual, even
couched in Christian terms. “There is a matter that I need to share with
you as a prayer request; this is just between us spiritual believers…”

NOTE : If you know something bad about a person, or you suspect
something, do not share it with anyone unless that person has a direct
hand in the solution of the problem. If in doubt, don’t talk about it!

Sins of the tongue are a sign of the believer’s reverting to the old way
of life, the condition of the carnal man. James 4:11; 5:9; 5:12, Romans
3:13,14. In fact, the believer who indulges in sins of the tongue cannot
be distinguished from an unbeliever. The believer is warned in Ephesians
4 not to fall into the life patterns of the unbeliever.

Eph. 4:17-22, 25, 29-32.

Verbal sins can destroy a family or a congregation. Things like gossip,
slander, maligning, judging, backbiting, and boasting are malicious,
venal, and destructive. James 3:5,6. Troublemakers are always
characterized by sins of the tongue. Psalm 52:2.

It is the duty of the pastor to warn against these things. 2
 Tim. 2:14-17. And believers are commanded to separate themselves from
such troublemakers. Rom. 16:17,18. This separation may be just a turning
away or refusal to comment or to reply in a conversation. Separation
does not mean ostracism or excommunication except in the worst cases. It
means, at first, refusal to participate. Teaching on this topic may
involve exhortation and rebuke, as in Titus 2:15. But such teaching,
plus the refusal of believers to participated in sins of the tongue,
will help the one who is having trouble with this to have victory.

Titus 1:10,11.

Sins of the tongue produce compounded divine discipline. Ps. 64:8; Matt.
7:1,2. First, there is discipline for the mental attitude sin which
motivates the verbal sin. Second, there is discipline for the verbal sin
itself. Third, there is discipline for the sins which one assigns to
another person in wrongly judging him - “with what measure you mete, it
shall be measured to you again.”

Types of Sins of the Tongue
---------------------------

*Backbiting* - slander, defamation of character, evil speech,
detraction. Found in several places in the Bible, including Rom. 1:30 as
one of the sins of the immoral person who has rejected God. READ Psalm
15:3; 50:20; 101:5; Proverbs 25:23; Jer. 9:4; Rom. 1:30; 2 Cor. 12:20.

*False Witness* - lying about people, especially while under oath.
Prov. 25:28; Exo. 32:1; Prov. 19:9. Examples of false witness:

- Against Stephen, Acts. 6:11

- Against Paul, Acts 25:7

- Against Christ, Matthew and Mark

*Perjury* - lying under oath. READ Lev. 6:3; 19:12; Zech. 5:4; Mal. 3:5;
1 Tim. 1:10

*Lying* - READ Prov. 12:22; 21:6; Col. 3:9; Lev. 19:11; Luke 20:20.

*Dissimulation* - Faking it, covering up, hypocrisy. Example: calling in
sick when not sick. READ 1 Sam. 21:13; Acts 23:12-15; 2 Sam. 14:2; 2
Kings 10:19; Luke 20:20.

*Busybody* - self-appointed monitor, or one who tries to straighten
others out. This word appears as a translation of several Greek
originals.

From(periergos), verb. (periergomai) “to do something useless
or unnecessary”. Literally, “to work around”. Also used in Greek to mean
“undue anxiety” over something which is not really a proper concern.

2 Thess. 3:11.

Also from (allotroepiskopos), a combining form
from, “belonging to another”, and , “bishop”. Hence,
the busybody is “another man’s bishop”.

1 Pet. 4:15.

*Talebearing* - slandering, whispering behind backs. Prov. 11:13; 17:9;
18:8

*Evil Whispering* - Prov. 16:28.

*Slander*- Psalm 101:5; 50:20; Prov. 10:18; 11:9; 2 Sam. 10:3; Job 1:11;
Luke 7:33.

*False Accusation* - READ 1 Sam. 1:14; Neh. 6:7; Job 2:5; 22:6; Jer.
33:17; Matt. 5:11; 27:12; Luke 6:7; 1 Peter 3:16.

*Evil Speaking* - READ Ps. 5:9; 10:7; 36:3; 55:21: Prov. 12:18; 24:2;
Matt. 12:34; Rom. 3:13; James 3:6; 4:11.

God provides protection for the believer who is, himself, a victim of
sins of the tongue. Job. 5:19–21.

Control of the tongue, the absence of verbal sins, is a sign of
Christian edification in the believer, and it is a sign of considerable
growth in Grace. James 3:2; 4:11,12. By avoiding sins of the tongue, the
Christian can lengthen his life and find great happiness. Ps. 34:12,13.

How to Have Victory Over Sins of the Tongue
-------------------------------------------

1. Grow daily in conformity with the Lord Jesus Christ

2. Ask God the Father for provision and protection in this area.

3. Confess this sin each time you are convicted of it.

4. Learn to recognize all of the verbal sins – some are obvious, some
are subtle.

5. Keep silent during discussion of a bad situation.

6. Keep silent during discussion of another person.

7. Keep silent.

RULE: Do not pass on derogatory or uncomplimentary information about
anyone, unless the Word of God has given you the specific authority and
responsibility to do so, and the person you are informing likewise has
responsibility in the situation and a need-to-know the information.

THE SIN UNTO DEATH
==================

The phrase “sin unto death” describes the final stage of divine
discipline in which God removes from the earth the person who is totally
alienated from God. The “sin unto death” is not a particular sin; but it
is, rather, a mental attitude of total indifference to and rebellion
against the will and purpose of God.

The spiritual condition of the person who comes under the “sin unto
death” is characterized by continual and maximum carnality; and this
punishment represents God’s final step of chastisement to those who are
in maximum alienation from God. Only God can discern the true nature of
a person’s mind, attitude, or volition; and only God knows whether a
person is actually implacable and deserving of physical death.

The “sin unto death” is described as a principle in 1 John 5:16; Psalm
118:17,18; and Ezek. 18:21-32.

It is important for the Christian to understand the circumstances under
which sins are not “unto death”.

First, sin which is confessed is not “unto death”. 1 John 1:9;
1 Cor. 11:31; Ps. 32:5; Ps. 38.

Second, sin which is discontinued is not “unto death”. Heb. 12:1; Eze.
18:21-32.

Finally, the person who responds positively to divine discipline is not
involved in the “sin unto death”. Heb. 12:6, cf. 12:11-15.

There are definite characteristics by which to recognize the conditions
which lead to God’s applying the “sin unto death”. Persistent,
unconfessed sin, sin which continues unchecked with no repentance, may
bring a person under this category. Also, the person who persistently
ignores Grace, warnings, and discipline may come under the “sin unto
death”. Lev. 26. Then, sin which has a maximum adverse effect on other
people (causing stumbling) may lead a person into severe discipline.

Some case histories of the “sin unto death”:

• The case of “lying to the Holy Spirit” (Ananias and Sapphira).
Acts 5:1-10.

• The case of persistent carnality while sitting at the Lord’s Table,
1 Cor. 11:30,31.

• The case of disobedience to the Word of God.1 Chron.10:13,14;
1 Sam. 13:9–14. King Saul did not kill Agag although directly ordered to
do so by God; he insisted on personally offering sacrifices in the place
of divinely appointed priests; and he consulted a witch, itself a
capital offense.

• The case of self-righteousness and dependence on man which was
perpetuated (case of Hezekiah). Isa. 38.

• The case of apostasy on the part of a believer. Num. 31:8; 1 Tim.
1:19,20.

SIN’S VICIOUS CIRCLE
====================

One sin leads to another. Sins are chained together and tend to
reinforce each other. The Christian must make a conscious effort to halt
the progress of sin at the beginning.

Mental attitude sins are the worst sins. They touch off other mental
sins, sins of the tongue, and the overt or open sins. And a Christian
will experience great self-induced misery in his life unless he learns
how to nip sin in the bud through confession and victory. Learning how
to recognize certain sin patterns is very useful in helping the believer
to be forearmed in the conflict.

The following are some examples of types of “chain sinning” which are to
be avoided.

Bitterness is a sin that involves someone else and leads to a chain of
sins. Any sin may lead to divine discipline. Even when a sin is
confessed, suffering which was begun under discipline may continue (even
though the cursing has been turned to blessing in the case of actual
suffering). Bitterness may reappear as the hurt continues – bitterness
against God or against other people.

Bitterness has another person as an object. It leads to vindictiveness
and implacability. These, in turn, lead to antagonism and revenge
tactics. Revenge tactics can include sins of the tongue such as judging,
maligning, gossip. Overt sin is possible, including social ostracism
(snubbing, shunning, not speaking), harassment, even violence. Murder,
for example, is the end result of a chain of sins stemming from
bitterness. The Christian living in bitterness tries to sublimate in
various ways, alcohol, drugs, emotional experiences, trying to maintain
the rosy glow, but he is never satisfied.

Guilt Association is a guilt complex that involves various parts of the
soul. The believer keeps bringing up sins of his past; his depression
leads to guilt feelings. He begins to associate every trouble in the
past with an ‘unforgiven’ sin of the past. He feels that God is
permanently displeased with him. A guilt complex like this leads to
blasphemy, that is, accusing God and maligning Him. This sin leads to a
lack of faith, hatred toward God and toward others who might be thought
responsible. Remember, when a sin is confessed, God forgets it; and the
believer is wrong to remember it. God does not discipline us ten years
after the fact. David had 26 good years after the Bathsheba incident.

Public confession of sin is used by people to vent a guilt complex. But
the one who confesses publicly is giving out gossip, about himself if no
one else. He presents material for temptation to other believers,
temptations to judge, to hate, to malign, to gossip. Public confession
leads to chain sinning in one’s own life and in the lives of others.
This is a failure to preserve the privacy of the priesthood. A Christian
may reveal sin problems privately to an intimate and confidential friend
who is a believer and who is in a position to exhort or counsel from the
Word of God. Otherwise, confession is made to God alone.

Intrusion upon divine prerogatives occurs when a believer tries to do
the word of God in judging, condemning, disciplining other people. The
Bible instructs each person to judge himself; and he may judge and
discipline his own children. Otherwise, it’s “live and let live”.

Gossip, the discussion of problems with outside parties is similar to
public confession. It makes problems for people and encourages mental
attitude sins and sins of the tongue. It leads to cliques, divisions,
mutual admiration societies. This activity is an attempt to build one’s
happiness on someone else’s unhappiness.

Failure to maintain relaxed mental attitude toward others refers to the
development of pseudo-love in the life. It does not allow for other
peoples’ areas of weakness, does not exhibit true love for others. It
leads to a failure to forgive, which in turn makes it impossible for the
Christian to be in a position to help through example or exhortation.

The solution to all sin problems of this type is edification, spiritual
growth through a daily walking in fellowship and the intake of Bible
teaching. Also required is a thorough knowledge of the doctrine of
Grace, the application of God’s gracious assets to the life, and the
development thereby of a gracious mental attitude and outward
disposition toward other people.

THE PLACE OF CONFESSION IN SOLVING THE SIN PROBLEM
==================================================

The presence of the Sin Nature in the soul guarantees that the Christian
believer will have a problem with active personal sin for the rest of
his life on earth. This personal sin causes a deep disturbance in the
believer’s personal relationship with the Lord. The Holy Spirit is said
to be personally “grieved” by a Christian’s sin, and His work “quenched”
by a Christian’s human good. While the believer does not lose his
salvation each time he sins, his personal growth and effectiveness are
stifled as long as there is a rift in his fellowship with God. This rift
is healed by means of the act of personal confession to God of the sin
which caused the breach.

Confession of sins is not the basis of salvation. Jesus Christ was
judged once for our sins, on the Cross; and He does not need to be
judged repeatedly for our sins. The basis of salvation is the
individual’s personal trust in Christ and His work, rather than
confession or any other act which a person might perform to try to win
the favor of God. Acts 16:31; John 1:12; Eph. 1:13,14; 2:8,9; 1 Pet.
2:24; 2 Cor. 5:21.

A Christian is always “in Christ”. Eph. 1:3,5,7. So confession of
personal sin is extremely important to the personal spiritual
relationship that he has with God. God requires confession of sin as the
means of maintaining a close personal walk with Himself. He requires,
that is, a continual acknowledgement of His rulership; and confession of
sin is the means by which the believer expresses his yieldedness and
surrender to the sovereign will of God on a moment by moment basis. The
Lord wants the Christian to have a very useful and happy life, and part
of His plan for providing this sort of life is confession of sin.

God Encourages the Believer to Confess Sin
------------------------------------------

A believer may not be aware, initially, that he can live out of
fellowship and that he needs to confess sin. 1 John 1:6; 2:9,10; 2 Pet.
1:9. God both commands and pleads with us to judge ourselves, to
confess, and then to forget sins. Isa. 43:26; 1 Cor. 11:28,31;
1 John 1:9; Phil. 3:13,14; Prov. 1:23. Any person who reads the Bible
quickly becomes aware of God’s intentions in this matter.

Some Christians willfully ignore the commands to confess, leading God to
employ more persuasive measures to encourage compliance. These methods
include (1) loss of inner peace, Phil. 4:6,7; (2) chastening
(discipline), Heb. 12:6; (3) pricking of conscience, Heb. 13:18; and (4)
sorrow for sin, Psalm 32. A few Christians manage to ignore even severe
chastening for a long time, leading to God’s administering the “sin unto
death”, described in a previous section. The alternative to confession
is discipline. Heb. 12:1-5.

The Mechanics of Confession of Sin
----------------------------------

Confession does not provide the believer with a license to sin. The
attitude that says “I can sin and confess repeatedly because God will
always forgive” is sinful in itself because it indicates that the
believer does not actually think the same about his sin that God does.
That is, there is no real repentance or confession. Nor does confession
of sin remove the buildup of callousness or hardness in the soul of the
person who has lived apart from God for a long time. This removal of
scar tissue is accomplished through edification, the Biblical system for
understanding and applying the Word of God.

Confession of sin does not provide an emotional experience, not is it
accompanied by an emotional reaction. God’s forgiveness is based on His
promise to cleanse, not on how a person feels. And, confession does not
always remove the pain or suffering which is the result of the sin
itself or which came as a result of divine discipline. Although the
cursing is turned to blessing, the suffering may continue; but the
suffering may be endured to the glory of God instead.

Some Christians try to get on God’s good side through some means other
than the confession which is prescribed by God. Sometimes a person
thinks that a demonstration of sorrowfulness is called for, or that
weeping will impress God with one’s contrition. Others “compensate” for
their sin by increasing their religious activities.

Some will pray more often and longer and read their Bibles more. Some
will try to bribe God with additional tithes and offerings, or with acts
of self-denial, sacrifice, or service. Some will present themselves in
re-dedication services and attend church functions more often. But these
things cannot be substituted for confession of sin. God is interested
only in a person’s mental attitude toward the sin.

The word “confession” in the New Testament is taken from the Greek word
, meaning “to cite”, “to name”, “to classify in the same
manner”, “to agree with”, “to say the same thing as”. Confession
acknowledges God’s rulership in the matter and agrees with His judgment.
This is a method of dealing with the disharmony caused by sins which
causes no merit to accrue to the person who confesses.

Confession is strictly a Grace provision in which God makes a promise
and carries out the function of cleansing. The Christian must (1)
confess the sin, 1 John 1:9; (2) forget the sin, Phil. 3:13,14; and (3)
isolate the sin, Heb. 12:15.

Since prayer is made only to God the Father (Mark. 2:7), confession is
made only to God the Father. Upon the condition of confession,
forgiveness is guaranteed and cleansing from all unrighteousness is
administered (1 John 1:9). The word “cleanse” refers to the removal of
the guilt of the sin. Therefore, the cleansed individual is removed from
the condition of discipline, chastening is no longer being administered,
and the hindrances to the ministry of the Holy Spirit are removed.

There are several synonyms in the Bible for the word “confess”, as
follows":

• To “yield” means to confess. Rom. 6:13.

• “Putting off the old man”, is tantamount to confession. Eph. 5:14.

• Judging oneself is confession, or leads to it. 1 Cor. 11:31.

• Presenting one’s body is analogous to confession. Rom. 12:1.

